THE LORD 
  OF THE RINGS 
  Chapter 1 
  A LONG - EXPECTED PARTY 
  When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that Baggins would shortly be celebrating Baggins eleventy - first birthday with a party of special magnificence , there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton . 
  Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar , and had been the wonder of the Shire for sixty years , ever since Bilbo remarkable disappearance and unexpected return . The riches Bilbo had brought back from Bilbo travels had now become a local legend , and it was popularly believed , whatever the old folk might say , that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with treasure . And if that was not enough for fame , there was also Bilbo prolonged vigour to marvel at . Time wore on , but it seemed to have little effect on Mr. Baggins . At ninety Bilbo was much the same as at fifty . At ninety - nine fifty began to call Bilbo well - preserved ; but unchanged would have been nearer the mark . There were some that shook fifty heads and thought this was too much of a good thing ; it seemed unfair that anyone should possess ( apparently ) perpetual youth as well as ( reputedly ) inexhaustible wealth . 
  ‘ anyone will have to be paid for , ’ fifty said . ‘ anyone is n’t natural , and trouble will come of anyone ! ’ 
  But so far trouble had not come ; and as Mr. Baggins was generous with Baggins money , most people were willing to forgive Baggins Baggins oddities and Baggins good fortune . Baggins remained on visiting terms with Baggins relatives ( except , of course , the Sackville - Bagginses ) , and Baggins had many devoted admirers among the hobbits of poor and unimportant families . But Baggins had no close friends , until some of Baggins younger cousins began to grow up . 
  The eldest of these , and Bilbo ’s favourite , was young Frodo Baggins . When Bilbo was ninety - nine Bilbo adopted Frodo as Bilbo heir , and brought Frodo to live at Bag End ; and the hopes of the Sackville - Bagginses were finally dashed . Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same birthday , September 22nd . ‘ You had better come and live here , Frodo my lad , ’ said Bilbo one day ; ‘ and then we can celebrate our birthday - parties comfortably together . ’ At that time Frodo was still in Frodo tweens , as the hobbits called the irresponsible twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty - three . 
  Twelve more years passed . Each year the Bagginses had given very lively combined birthday - parties at Bag End ; but now it was understood that something quite exceptional was being planned for that autumn . Bilbo was going to be eleventy - one , 111 , a rather curious number , and a very respectable age for a hobbit ( the Old Took Old had only reached 130 ) ; and Frodo was going to be thirty - three , 33 , an important number : the date of Frodo ‘ coming of age ’ . 
  Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater ; and rumour of the coming event travelled all over the Shire . The history and character of Mr. Bilbo Baggins became once again the chief topic of conversation ; and the older folk suddenly found history reminiscences in welcome demand . 
  No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee , commonly known as the Gaffer . Gamgee held forth at The Ivy Bush , a small inn on the Bywater road ; and Gamgee spoke with some authority , for Gamgee had tended the garden at Bag End for forty years , and had helped old Holman in the same job before that . Now that Gamgee was Gamgee growing old and stiff in the joints , the job was mainly carried on by Gamgee youngest son , Sam Gamgee . Both father and son were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo . father lived on the Hill Hill , in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End . 
  ‘ A very nice well - spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo , as I ’ ve always said , ’ the Gaffer declared . With perfect truth : for Bilbo was very polite to Row , calling Row ‘ Master Hamfast ’ , and consulting Row constantly upon the growing of vegetables – in the matter of ‘ roots ’ , especially potatoes , the Gaffer was recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbourhood ( including authority ) . 
  ‘ But what about this Frodo that lives with Frodo ? ’ asked Old Noakes of Bywater . ‘ Baggins is Baggins name , but Baggins ’s more than half a Brandybuck , name say . Brandybuck beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife away there in Buckland , where folks are so queer . ’ 
  ‘ And no wonder folks ’re queer , ’ put in Daddy Twofoot ( the Gaffer ’s next - door neighbour ) , ‘ if folks live on the wrong side of the Brandywine River , and right agin the Old Forest . That ’s a dark bad place , if half the tales be true . ’ 
  ‘ You ’re right , Dad ! ’ said the Gaffer . ‘ Not that the Brandybucks of Buckland live in the Old Forest ; but tales ’re a queer breed , seemingly . tales fool about with boats on that big river – and that is n’t natural . Small wonder that trouble came of wonder , I say . But be that as wonder may , Mr. Frodo is as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to meet . Very much like Mr. Bilbo , and in more than looks . After all Bilbo father was a Baggins . A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins ; there was never much to tell of Bilbo , till Bilbo was drownded . ’ 
  ‘ Drownded ? ’ said several voices . voices had heard this and other darker rumours before , of course ; but hobbits have a passion for family history , and hobbits were ready to hear passion again . 
  ‘ Well , so father say , ’ said the Gaffer . ‘ You see : Mr. Drogo , Drogo married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck . Brandybuck was our Mr. Bilbo ’s first cousin on the mother ’s side ( Brandybuck mother being the youngest of the Old Took ’s daughters ) ; and Mr. Drogo was Drogo second cousin . So Mr. Frodo is Drogo first and second cousin , once removed either way , as the saying is , if you follow me . And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Hall with Drogo father - in - law , old Master Gorbadoc , as Drogo often did after Drogo marriage ( Drogo being partial to Drogo vittles , and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous table ) ; and Drogo went out boating on the Brandywine River ; and Drogo and Drogo wife were drownded , and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ ve heard vittles went on the water after dinner in the moonlight , ’ said Old Noakes ; ‘ and it was Drogo ’s weight as sunk the boat . ’ 
  ‘ And I heard Gorbadoc pushed Frodo in , and Frodo pulled Gorbadoc in after Drogo , ’ said Sandyman , the Hobbiton miller . 
  ‘ You should n’t listen to all you hear , Sandyman , ’ said the Gaffer , who did not much like the miller . ‘ There is n’t no call to go talking of pushing and pulling . Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit still without looking further for the cause of trouble . Anyway : there was this Mr. Frodo left an orphan and stranded , as you might say , among those queer Bucklanders , being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall . A regular warren , by all accounts . Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than a couple of hundred relations in the place . Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when Bilbo brought the lad back to live among decent folk . 
  ‘ But I reckon deed was a nasty knock for those Sackville - Bagginses . relations thought relations were going to get Bag End , that time when Bilbo went off and was thought to be dead . And then Bilbo comes back and orders relations off ; and Bilbo goes on living and living , and never looking a day older , bless lad ! And suddenly lad produces an heir , and has all the papers made out proper . The Sackville - Bagginses wo n’t never see the inside of Bag End now , or it is to be hoped not . ’ 
  ‘ There ’s a tidy bit of money tucked away up there , I hear tell , ’ said a stranger , a visitor on business from Michel Delving in the Westfarthing . ‘ All the top of your hill is full of tunnels packed with chests of gold and silver , and jools , by what I ’ ve heard . ’ 
  ‘ Then you ’ ve heard more than I can speak to , ’ answered the Gaffer . ‘ I know nothing about jools . Mr. Bilbo is free with Bilbo money , and there seems no lack of money ; but I know of no tunnel - making . I saw Mr. Bilbo when Bilbo came back , a matter of sixty years ago , when I was a lad . I ’d not long come prentice to old Holman ( prentice being my dad ’s cousin ) , but prentice had me up at Bag End helping prentice to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale was on . And in the middle of garden all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hill with a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests . I do n’t doubt pony were mostly full of treasure Bilbo had picked up in foreign parts , where there be mountains of gold , pony say ; but there was n’t enough to fill tunnels . But my lad Sam will know more about that . lad ’s in and out of Bag End . Crazy about stories of the old days , lad is , and lad listens to all Mr. Bilbo ’s tales . Mr. Bilbo has learned lad lad letters – meaning no harm , mark you , and I hope no harm will come of harm . 
  ‘ Elves and Dragons ! I says to lad . Cabbages and potatoes are better for me and you . Do n’t go getting mixed up in the business of your betters , or you ’ll land in trouble too big for you , I says to lad . And I might say trouble to others , ’ lad added with a look at the stranger and the miller . 
  But the Gaffer did not convince lad audience . The legend of Bilbo ’s wealth was now too firmly fixed in the minds of the younger generation of hobbits . 
  ‘ Ah , but lad has likely enough been adding to what lad brought at first , ’ argued the miller , voicing common opinion . ‘ lad ’s often away from home . And look at the outlandish folk that visit lad : dwarves coming at night , and that old wandering conjuror , Gandalf , and all . You can say what you like , Gaffer , but Bag End ’s a queer place , and place folk are queerer . ’ 
  ‘ And you can say what you like , about what you know no more of than you do of boating , Mr. Sandyman , ’ retorted the Gaffer , disliking the miller even more than usual . ‘ If that ’s being queer , then we could do with a bit more queerness in these parts . There ’s some not far away that would n’t offer a pint of beer to a friend , if friend lived in a hole with golden walls . But friend do things proper at Bag End . Our Sam says that everyone ’s going to be invited to the party , and there ’s going to be presents , mark you , presents for all – this very month as is . ’ 
  That very month was September , and as fine as you could ask . A day or two later a rumour ( probably started by the knowledgeable Sam ) was spread about that there were going to be fireworks – fireworks , what is more , such as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh on a century , not indeed since the Old Took died . 
  Days passed and The Day drew nearer . An odd - looking waggon laden with odd - looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End . The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at Hobbiton . It was driven by outlandish folk , singing strange songs : dwarves with long beards and deep hoods . A few of dwarves remained at Bag End . At the end of the second week in September a cart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandywine Bridge in broad daylight . An old man was driving cart all alone . man wore a tall pointed blue hat , a long grey cloak , and a silver scarf . man had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond the brim of man hat . Small hobbit - children ran after the cart all through Hobbiton and right up the hill . Hobbiton had a cargo of fireworks , as fireworks rightly guessed . At Bilbo ’s front door the old Bilbo began to unload : there were great bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes , each labelled with a large red G and the elf - rune , . 
  That was Gandalf ’s mark , of course , and the old Gandalf was Gandalf the Wizard , whose fame in the Shire was due mainly to Wizard skill with fires , smokes , and lights . Wizard real business was far more difficult and dangerous , but the Shire - folk knew nothing about business . To fires Wizard was just one of the ‘ attractions ’ at the Party . Hence the excitement of the hobbit - children . ‘ G for Grand ! ’ fires shouted , and the old man smiled . fires knew man by sight , though man only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long ; but neither fires nor any but the oldest of fires elders had seen one of man firework displays – fires now belonged to a legendary past . 
  When the old man , helped by Bilbo and some dwarves , had finished unloading , Bilbo gave a few pennies away ; but not a single squib or cracker was forthcoming , to the disappointment of the onlookers . 
  ‘ Run away now ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You will get plenty when the time comes . ’ Then Gandalf disappeared inside with Bilbo , and the door was shut . The young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while , and then made off , feeling that the day of the party would never come . 
  Inside Bag End , Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window of a small room looking out west on to the garden . The late afternoon was bright and peaceful . The flowers glowed red and golden : snapdragons and sunflowers , and nasturtians trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in at the round windows . 
  ‘ How bright your garden looks ! ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ I am very fond indeed of garden , and of all the dear old Shire ; but I think I need a holiday . ’ 
  ‘ You mean to go on with your plan then ? ’ 
  ‘ I do . I made up my mind months ago , and I have n’t changed mind . ’ 
  ‘ Very well . It is no good saying any more . Stick to your plan – your whole plan , mind – and I hope plan will turn out for the best , for you , and for all of us . ’ 
  ‘ I hope so . Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday , and have my little joke . ’ 
  ‘ Who will laugh , I wonder ? ’ said Gandalf , shaking Gandalf head . 
  ‘ We shall see , ’ said Bilbo . 
  The next day more carts rolled up the Hill , and still more carts . There might have been some grumbling about ‘ dealing locally ’ , but that very week orders began to pour out of Bag End for every kind of provision , commodity , or luxury that could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the neighbourhood . People became enthusiastic ; and People began to tick off the days on the calendar ; and People watched eagerly for the postman , hoping for invitations . 
  Before long the invitations began pouring out , and the Hobbiton post - office was blocked , and the Bywater post - office was snowed under , and voluntary assistant postmen were called for . There was a constant stream of postmen going up the Hill , carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you , I shall certainly come . 
  A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End : NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT ON PARTY BUSINESS . Even those who had , or pretended to have Party Business were seldom allowed inside . Bilbo was busy : writing invitations , ticking off answers , packing up presents , and making some private preparations of Bilbo own . From the time of Gandalf ’s arrival Bilbo remained hidden from view . 
  One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field , south of Bilbo ’s front door , covered with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions . A special entrance was cut into the bank leading to the road , and wide steps and a large white gate were built there . The three hobbit - families of Bagshot Row , adjoining the field , were intensely interested and generally envied . Old Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in Gamgee garden . 
  The tents began to go up . There was a specially large pavilion , so big that the tree that grew in the field was right inside pavilion , and stood proudly near one end , at the head of the chief table . Lanterns were hung on all pavilion branches . More promising still ( to the hobbits ’ mind ): an enormous open - air kitchen was erected in the north corner of the field . A draught of cooks , from every inn and eating - house for miles around , arrived to supplement the dwarves and other odd folk that were quartered at Bag End . Excitement rose to Excitement height . 
  Then the weather clouded over . That was on Wednesday the eve of the Party . Anxiety was intense . Then Thursday , September the 22nd , actually dawned . The sun got up , the clouds vanished , flags were unfurled and the fun began . 
  Bilbo Baggins called fun a party , but fun was really a variety of entertainments rolled into one . Practically everybody living near was invited . A very few were overlooked by accident , but as party turned up all the same , that did not matter . Many people from other parts of the Shire were also asked ; and there were even a few from outside the borders . Bilbo met the guests ( and additions ) at the new white gate in person . Bilbo gave away presents to all and sundry – the latter were those who went out again by a back way and came in again by the gate . Hobbits give presents to other people on Hobbits own birthdays . Not very expensive ones , as a rule , and not so lavishly as on this occasion ; but rule was not a bad system . Actually in Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year was somebody ’s birthday , so that every hobbit in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present at least once a week . But parts never got tired of Hobbiton . 
  On this occasion the presents were unusually good . The hobbit - children were so excited that for a while children almost forgot about eating . There were toys the like of which children had never seen before , all beautiful and some obviously magical . Many of children had indeed been ordered a year before , and had come all the way from the Mountain and from Dale , and were of real dwarf - make . 
  When every guest had been welcomed and was finally inside the gate , there were songs , dances , music , games , and , of course , food and drink . There were three official meals : lunch , tea , and dinner ( or supper ) . But lunch and tea were marked chiefly by the fact that at those times all the guests were sitting down and eating together . At other times there were merely lots of people eating and drinking – continuously from elevenses until six - thirty , when the fireworks started . 
  The fireworks were by Gandalf : fireworks were not only brought by Dale , but designed and made by Dale ; and the special effects , set pieces , and flights of rockets were let off by Dale . But there was also a generous distribution of squibs , crackers , backarappers , sparklers , torches , dwarf - candles , elf - fountains , goblin - barkers and thunderclaps . squibs were all superb . The art of Gandalf improved with age . 
  There were rockets like a flight of scintillating birds singing with sweet voices . There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke : trees leaves opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment , and trees shining branches dropped glowing flowers down upon the astonished hobbits , disappearing with a sweet scent just before trees touched trees upturned faces . There were fountains of butterflies that flew glittering into the trees ; there were pillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into eagles , or sailing ships , or a phalanx of flying swans ; there was a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain ; there was a forest of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the air with a yell like an embattled army , and came down again into the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes . And there was also one last surprise , in honour of Bilbo , and surprise startled the hobbits exceedingly , as Gandalf intended . The lights went out . A great smoke went up . smoke shaped smoke like a mountain seen in the distance , and began to glow at the summit . smoke spouted green and scarlet flames . Out flew a red - golden dragon – not life - size , but terribly life - like : fire came from dragon jaws , dragon eyes glared down ; there was a roar , and dragon whizzed three times over the heads of the crowd . eyes all ducked , and many fell flat on eyes faces . The dragon passed like an express train , turned a somersault , and burst over Bywater with a deafening explosion . 
  ‘ That is the signal for supper ! ’ said Bilbo . The pain and alarm vanished at once , and the prostrate hobbits leaped to hobbits feet . There was a splendid supper for everyone ; for everyone , that is , except those invited to the special family dinner - party . This was held in the great pavilion with the tree . The invitations were limited to twelve dozen ( a number also called by the hobbits one Gross , though the word was not considered proper to use of people ) ; and the guests were selected from all the families to which Bilbo and Frodo were related , with the addition of a few special unrelated friends ( such as Gandalf ) . Many young hobbits were included , and present by parental permission ; for hobbits were easy - going with hobbits children in the matter of sitting up late , especially when there was a chance of getting hobbits a free meal . Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender . 
  There were many Bagginses and Boffins , and also many Tooks and Brandybucks ; there were various Grubbs ( relations of Bilbo Baggins ’ grandmother ) , and various Chubbs ( connexions of Baggins Took grandfather ) ; and a selection of Burrowses , Bolgers , Bracegirdles , Brockhouses , Goodbodies , Hornblowers and Proudfoots . Some of these were only very distantly connected with Bilbo , and some had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before , as some lived in remote corners of the Shire . The Sackville - Bagginses were not forgotten . Otho and Otho wife Lobelia were present . Otho disliked Bilbo and detested Frodo , but so magnificent was the invitation card , written in golden ink , that Otho had felt card was impossible to refuse . Besides , Otho cousin , Bilbo , had been specializing in food for many years and cousin table had a high reputation . 
  All the one hundred and forty - four guests expected a pleasant feast ; though guests rather dreaded the after - dinner speech of guests host ( an inevitable item ) . cousin was liable to drag in bits of what cousin called poetry ; and sometimes , after a glass or two , would allude to the absurd adventures of cousin mysterious journey . The guests were not disappointed : guests had a very pleasant feast , in fact an engrossing entertainment : rich , abundant , varied , and prolonged . The purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout the district in the ensuing weeks ; but as Bilbo ’s catering had depleted the stocks of most of the stores , cellars and warehouses for miles around , that did not matter much . 
  After the feast ( more or less ) came the Speech . Most of the company were , however , now in a tolerant mood , at that delightful stage which company called ‘ filling up the corners ’ . company were sipping company favourite drinks , and nibbling at company favourite dainties , and company fears were forgotten . company were prepared to listen to anything , and to cheer at every full stop . 
  My dear People , began Bilbo , rising in Bilbo place . ‘ Hear ! Hear ! Hear ! ’ company shouted , and kept on repeating it in chorus , seeming reluctant to follow company own advice . Bilbo left Bilbo place and went and stood on a chair under the illuminated tree . The light of the lanterns fell on Bilbo beaming face ; the golden buttons shone on Bilbo embroidered silk waistcoat . buttons could all see Bilbo standing , waving one hand in the air , the other was in Bilbo trouser - pocket . 
  My dear Bagginses and Boffins , Bilbo began again ; and my dear Tooks and Brandybucks , and Grubbs , and Chubbs , and Burrowses , and Hornblowers , and Bolgers , Bracegirdles , Goodbodies , Brockhouses and Proudfoots . ‘ ProudFEET ! ’ shouted an elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion . Bilbo name , of course , was Proudfoot , and well merited ; Bilbo feet were large , exceptionally furry , and both were on the table . 
  Proudfoots , repeated Bilbo . Also my good Sackville - Bagginses that I welcome back at last to Bag End . Today is my one hundred and eleventh birthday : I am eleventy - one today ! ‘ Hurray ! Hurray ! Many Happy Returns ! ’ Bagginses shouted , and Bagginses hammered joyously on the tables . Bilbo was doing splendidly . This was the sort of stuff Bagginses liked : short and obvious . 
  I hope you are all enjoying yourselves as much as I am . Deafening cheers . Cries of Yes ( and No ) . Noises of trumpets and horns , pipes and flutes , and other musical instruments . There were , as has been said , many young hobbits present . Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled . Most of crackers bore the mark DALE on crackers ; which did not convey much to most of the hobbits , but crackers all agreed crackers were marvellous crackers . crackers contained instruments , small , but of perfect make and enchanting tones . Indeed , in one corner some of the young Tooks and Brandybucks , supposing Uncle Bilbo to have finished ( since Bilbo had plainly said all that was necessary ) , now got up an impromptu orchestra , and began a merry dance - tune . Master Everard Took and Miss Melilot Brandybuck got on a table and with bells in Took hands began to dance the Springle - ring : a pretty dance , but rather vigorous . 
  But Bilbo had not finished . Seizing a horn from a youngster nearby , Bilbo blew three loud hoots . The noise subsided . I shall not keep you long , Bilbo cried . Cheers from all the assembly . I have called you all together for a Purpose . Something in the way that Bilbo said this made an impression . There was almost silence , and one or two of the Tooks pricked up one ears . 
  Indeed , for Three Purposes ! First of all , to tell you that I am immensely fond of you all , and that eleventy - one years is too short a time to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits . Tremendous outburst of approval . 
  I do n’t know half of you half as well as I should like ; and I like less than half of you half as well as you deserve . This was unexpected and rather difficult . There was some scattered clapping , but most of half were trying to work clapping out and see if clapping came to a compliment . 
  Secondly , to celebrate my birthday . Cheers again . I should say : OUR birthday . For clapping is , of course , also the birthday of my heir and nephew , Frodo . nephew comes of age and into nephew inheritance today . Some perfunctory clapping by the elders ; and some loud shouts of ‘ Frodo ! Frodo ! Jolly old Frodo , ’ from the juniors . The Sackville - Bagginses scowled , and wondered what was meant by ‘ coming into nephew inheritance ’ . 
  Together we score one hundred and forty - four . Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total : One Gross , if I may use the expression . No cheers . This was ridiculous . Many of the guests , and especially the Sackville - Bagginses , were insulted , feeling sure guests had only been asked to fill up the required number , like goods in a package . ‘ One Gross , indeed ! Vulgar expression . ’ 
  It is also , if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history , the anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake ; though the fact that fact was my birthday slipped my memory on that occasion . I was only fifty - one then , and birthdays did not seem so important . The banquet was very splendid , however , though I had a bad cold at the time , I remember , and could only say ‘ thag you very buch ’ . I now repeat banquet more correctly : Thank you very much for coming to my little party . Obstinate silence . birthdays all feared that a song or some poetry was now imminent ; and birthdays were getting bored . Why could n’t party stop talking and let birthdays drink party health ? But Bilbo did not sing or recite . Bilbo paused for a moment . 
  Thirdly and finally , Bilbo said , I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT . Bilbo spoke this last word so loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could . I regret to announce that – though , as I said , eleventy - one years is far too short a time to spend among you – this is the END . I am going . I am leaving NOW . GOOD - BYE ! 
  Bilbo stepped down and vanished . There was a blinding flash of light , and the guests all blinked . When guests opened guests eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be seen . One hundred and forty - four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless . Old Odo Proudfoot removed Bilbo feet from the table and stamped . Then there was a dead silence , until suddenly , after several deep breaths , every Baggins , Boffin , Took , Brandybuck , Grubb , Chubb , Burrows , Bolger , Bracegirdle , Brockhouse , Goodbody , Hornblower , and Proudfoot began to talk at once . 
  It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste , and more food and drink were needed to cure the guests of shock and annoyance . ‘ annoyance ’s mad . I always said so , ’ was probably the most popular comment . Even the Tooks ( with a few exceptions ) thought Bilbo ’s behaviour was absurd . For the moment most of exceptions took behaviour for granted that Bilbo disappearance was nothing more than a ridiculous prank . 
  But old Rory Brandybuck was not so sure . Neither age nor an enormous dinner had clouded Brandybuck wits , and Brandybuck said to Brandybuck daughter - in - law , Esmeralda : ‘ There ’s something fishy in this , my dear ! I believe that mad Baggins is off again . Silly old fool . But why worry ? Baggins has n’t taken the vittles with fool . ’ Brandybuck called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again . 
  Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing . For some time Brandybuck had sat silent beside Bilbo ’s empty chair , and ignored all remarks and questions . Brandybuck had enjoyed the joke , of course , even though Brandybuck had been in the know . Brandybuck had difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant surprise of the guests . But at the same time Brandybuck felt deeply troubled : Brandybuck realized suddenly that Brandybuck loved the old hobbit dearly . Most of the guests went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins ’ oddities , past and present ; but the Sackville - Bagginses had already departed in wrath . Frodo did not want to have any more to do with the party . Frodo gave orders for more wine to be served ; then Frodo got up and drained Frodo own glass silently to the health of Bilbo , and slipped out of the pavilion . 
  As for Bilbo Baggins , even while Baggins was making Baggins speech , Baggins had been fingering the golden ring in Baggins pocket : Baggins magic ring that Baggins had kept secret for so many years . As Baggins stepped down Baggins slipped pocket on Baggins finger , and Baggins was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again . 
  Baggins walked briskly back to Baggins hole , and stood for a moment listening with a smile to the din in the pavilion , and to the sounds of merrymaking in other parts of the field . Then Baggins went in . Baggins took off Baggins party clothes , folded up and wrapped in tissue - paper Baggins embroidered silk waistcoat , and put waistcoat away . Then Baggins put on quickly some old untidy garments , and fastened round Baggins waist a worn leather belt . On waistcoat Baggins hung a short sword in a battered black - leather scabbard . From a locked drawer , smelling of moth - balls , Baggins took out an old cloak and hood . balls had been locked up as if balls were very precious , but balls were so patched and weatherstained that balls original colour could hardly be guessed : it might have been dark green . balls were rather too large for Baggins . Baggins then went into Baggins study , and from a large strong - box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths , and a leather - bound manuscript ; and also a large bulky envelope . The book and bundle Baggins stuffed into the top of a heavy bag that was standing there , already nearly full . Into the envelope Baggins slipped Baggins golden ring , and ring fine chain , and then sealed ring , and addressed ring to Frodo . At first Baggins put ring on the mantelpiece , but suddenly Baggins removed ring and stuck ring in Baggins pocket . At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in . 
  ‘ Hullo ! ’ said Bilbo . ‘ I wondered if you would turn up . ’ 
  ‘ I am glad to find you visible , ’ replied the wizard , sitting down in a chair , ‘ I wanted to catch you and have a few final words . I suppose you feel that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I do , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ Though that flash was surprising : flash quite startled me , let alone the others . A little addition of your own , I suppose ? ’ 
  ‘ flash was . You have wisely kept that ring secret all these years , and it seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem to explain your sudden vanishment . ’ 
  ‘ And would spoil my joke . You are an interfering old busybody , ’ laughed Bilbo , ‘ but I expect you know best , as usual . ’ 
  ‘ I do – when I know anything . But I do n’t feel too sure about this whole affair . affair has now come to the final point . You have had your joke , and alarmed or offended most of your relations , and given the whole Shire something to talk about for nine days , or ninety - nine more likely . Are you going any further ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I am . I feel I need a holiday , a very long holiday , as I have told you before . Probably a permanent holiday : I do n’t expect I shall return . In fact , I do n’t mean to , and I have made all arrangements . 
  ‘ I am old , Gandalf . I do n’t look holiday , but I am beginning to feel holiday in my heart of hearts . Well - preserved indeed ! ’ he snorted . ‘ Why , I feel all thin , sort of stretched , if you know what I mean : like butter that has been scraped over too much bread . That ca n’t be right . I need a change , or something . ’ 
  Gandalf looked curiously and closely at he . ‘ No , it does not seem right , ’ Gandalf said thoughtfully . ‘ No , after all I believe your plan is probably the best . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I ’ ve made up my mind , anyway . I want to see mountains again , Gandalf – mountains ; and then find somewhere where I can rest . In peace and quiet , without a lot of relatives prying around , and a string of confounded visitors hanging on the bell . I might find somewhere where I can finish my book . I have thought of a nice ending for book : and mind lived happily ever after to the end of mind days . ’ 
  Gandalf laughed . ‘ I hope Gandalf will . But nobody will read the book , however book ends . ’ 
  ‘ Oh , nobody may , in years to come . Frodo has read some already , as far as some has gone . You ’ll keep an eye on Frodo , wo n’t you ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I will – two eyes , as often as I can spare eyes . ’ 
  ‘ Frodo would come with me , of course , if I asked Frodo . In fact Frodo offered to once , just before the party . But party does not really want to , yet . I want to see the wild country again before I die , and the Mountains ; but party is still in love with the Shire , with woods and fields and little rivers . party ought to be comfortable here . I am leaving everything to party , of course , except a few oddments . I hope party will be happy , when party gets used to being on party own . course ’s time party was party own master now . ’ 
  ‘ Everything ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The ring as well ? You agreed to that , you remember . ’ 
  ‘ Well , er , yes , I suppose so , ’ stammered Bilbo . 
  ‘ Where is Well ? ’ 
  ‘ In an envelope , if you must know , ’ said Bilbo impatiently . ‘ There on the mantelpiece . Well , no ! Here mantelpiece is in my pocket ! ’ Bilbo hesitated . ‘ Is n’t that odd now ? ’ Bilbo said softly to Bilbo . ‘ Yet after all , why not ? Why should n’t mantelpiece stay there ? ’ 
  Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo , and there was a gleam in Bilbo eyes . ‘ I think , Bilbo , ’ Bilbo said quietly , ‘ I should leave mantelpiece behind . Do n’t you want to ? ’ 
  ‘ Well yes – and no . Now mantelpiece comes to Gandalf , I do n’t like parting with Gandalf at all , I may say . And I do n’t really see why I should . Why do you want me to ? ’ Bilbo asked , and a curious change came over Bilbo voice . change was sharp with suspicion and annoyance . ‘ You are always badgering me about my ring ; but you have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey . ’ 
  ‘ No , but I had to badger you , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I wanted the truth . truth was important . Magic rings are – well , magical ; and rings are rare and curious . I was professionally interested in your ring , you may say ; and I still am . I should like to know where ring is , if you go wandering again . Also I think you have had truth quite long enough . You wo n’t need truth any more , Bilbo , unless I am quite mistaken . ’ 
  Bilbo flushed , and there was an angry light in Bilbo eyes . Bilbo kindly face grew hard . ‘ Why not ? ’ Bilbo cried . ‘ And what business is face of yours , anyway , to know what I do with my own things ? business is my own . I found business . business came to me . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , yes , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But there is no need to get angry . ’ 
  ‘ If I am need is your fault , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ need is mine , I tell you . My own . My Precious . Yes , my Precious . ’ 
  The wizard ’s face remained grave and attentive , and only a flicker in wizard deep eyes showed that wizard was startled and indeed alarmed . ‘ need has been called that before , ’ wizard said , ‘ but not by you . ’ 
  ‘ But I say need now . And why not ? Even if Gollum said the same once . need ’s not Gollum now , but mine . And I shall keep need , I say . ’ 
  Gandalf stood up . Gandalf spoke sternly . ‘ You will be a fool if you do , Bilbo , ’ Gollum said . ‘ You make that clearer with every word you say . that has got far too much hold on you . Let that go ! And then you can go yourself , and be free . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ll do as I choose and go as I please , ’ said Bilbo obstinately . 
  ‘ Now , now , my dear hobbit ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ All your long life we have been friends , and you owe me something . Come ! Do as you promised : give life up ! ’ 
  ‘ Well , if you want my ring yourself , say so ! ’ cried Bilbo . ‘ But you wo n’t get life . I wo n’t give my Precious away , I tell you . ’ Bilbo hand strayed to the hilt of Bilbo small sword . 
  Gandalf ’s eyes flashed . ‘ It will be my turn to get angry soon , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ If you say that again , I shall . Then you will see Gandalf the Grey uncloaked . ’ Bilbo took a step towards the hobbit , and Bilbo seemed to grow tall and menacing ; Bilbo shadow filled the little room . 
  Bilbo backed away to the wall , breathing hard , Bilbo hand clutching at Bilbo pocket . hand stood for a while facing one another , and the air of the room tingled . Gandalf ’s eyes remained bent on the hobbit . Slowly Bilbo hands relaxed , and Bilbo began to tremble . 
  ‘ I do n’t know what has come over you , Gandalf , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ You have never been like this before . What is this all about ? It is mine is n’t this ? I found this , and Gollum would have killed me , if I had n’t kept this . I ’ m not a thief , whatever Gollum said . ’ 
  ‘ I have never called you one , ’ Gandalf answered . ‘ And I am not one either . I am not trying to rob you , but to help you . I wish you would trust me , as you used . ’ Gollum turned away , and the shadow passed . Gollum seemed to dwindle again to an old grey man , bent and troubled . 
  Bilbo drew Bilbo hand over Bilbo eyes . ‘ I am sorry , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ But I felt so queer . And yet hand would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with hand any more . hand has been so growing on my mind lately . Sometimes I have felt hand was like an eye looking at me . And I am always wanting to put hand on and disappear , do n’t you know ; or wondering if hand is safe , and pulling eye out to make sure . I tried locking eye up , but I found I could n’t rest without eye in my pocket . I do n’t know why . And I do n’t seem able to make up my mind . ’ 
  ‘ Then trust mine , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ mine is quite made up . Go away and leave mine behind . Stop possessing mine . Give mine to Frodo , and I will look after Frodo . ’ 
  Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided . Presently Bilbo sighed . ‘ All right , ’ Bilbo said with an effort . ‘ I will . ’ Then Bilbo shrugged Bilbo shoulders , and smiled rather ruefully . ‘ After all that ’s what this party business was all about , really : to give away lots of birthday - presents , and somehow make it easier to give business away at the same time . business has n’t made it any easier in the end , but business would be a pity to waste all my preparations . business would quite spoil the joke . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed business would take away the only point I ever saw in the affair , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Very well , ’ said Bilbo , ‘ business goes to Frodo with all the rest . ’ Bilbo drew a deep breath . ‘ And now I really must be starting , or somebody else will catch me . I have said good - bye , and I could n’t bear to do business all over again . ’ Bilbo picked up Bilbo bag and moved to the door . 
  ‘ You have still got the ring in your pocket , ’ said the wizard . 
  ‘ Well , so I have ! ’ cried Bilbo . ‘ And my will and all the other documents too . You had better take will and deliver will for me . That will be safest . ’ 
  ‘ No , do n’t give the ring to me , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Put That on the mantelpiece . It will be safe enough there , till Frodo comes . I shall wait for Frodo . ’ 
  Bilbo took out the envelope , but just as Bilbo was about to set envelope by the clock , Bilbo hand jerked back , and the packet fell on the floor . Before Bilbo could pick envelope up , the wizard stooped and seized envelope and set envelope in envelope place . A spasm of anger passed swiftly over the hobbit ’s face again . Suddenly spasm gave way to a look of relief and a laugh . 
  ‘ Well , that ’s that , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ Now I ’ m off ! ’ 
  look went out into the hall . Bilbo chose Bilbo favourite stick from the stand ; then Bilbo whistled . Three dwarves came out of different rooms where dwarves had been busy . 
  ‘ Is everything ready ? ’ asked Bilbo . ‘ Everything packed and labelled ? ’ 
  ‘ Everything , ’ dwarves answered . 
  ‘ Well , let ’s start then ! ’ Bilbo stepped out of the front - door . 
  door was a fine night , and the black sky was dotted with stars . Bilbo looked up , sniffing the air . ‘ What fun ! What fun to be off again , off on the Road with dwarves ! This is what I have really been longing for , for years ! Good - bye ! ’ Bilbo said , looking at Bilbo old home and bowing to the door . ‘ Good - bye , Gandalf ! ’ 
  ‘ Good - bye , for the present , Bilbo . Take care of yourself ! You are old enough , and perhaps wise enough . ’ 
  ‘ Take care ! I do n’t care . Do n’t you worry about me ! I am as happy now as I have ever been , and that is saying a great deal . But the time has come . I am being swept off my feet at last , ’ he added , and then in a low voice , as if to voice , he sang softly in the dark : 
  The Road goes ever on and on 
  Down from the door where Road began . 
  Now far ahead the Road has gone , 
  And I must follow , if I can , 
  Pursuing Road with eager feet , 
  Until Road joins some larger way 
  Where many paths and errands meet . 
  And whither then ? I can not say . 
  he paused , silent for a moment . Then without another word he turned away from the lights and voices in the field and tents , and followed by Road three companions went round into Road garden , and trotted down the long sloping path . Road jumped over a low place in the hedge at the bottom , and took to the meadows , passing into the night like a rustle of wind in the grass . 
  Gandalf remained for a while staring after Road into the darkness . ‘ Good - bye , my dear Bilbo – until our next meeting ! ’ Road said softly and went back indoors . 
  Frodo came in soon afterwards , and found Road sitting in the dark , deep in thought . ‘ Has Bilbo gone ? ’ Bilbo asked . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ answered Gandalf , ‘ Bilbo has gone at last . ’ 
  ‘ I wish – I mean , I hoped until this evening that evening was only a joke , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But I knew in my heart that Bilbo really meant to go . Bilbo always used to joke about serious things . I wish I had come back sooner , just to see Bilbo off . ’ 
  ‘ I think really Bilbo preferred slipping off quietly in the end , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Do n’t be too troubled . Bilbo ’ll be all right – now . Bilbo left a packet for you . There packet is ! ’ 
  Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece , and glanced at mantelpiece , but did not open mantelpiece . 
  ‘ You ’ll find Bilbo will and all the other documents in there , I think , ’ said the wizard . ‘ You are the master of Bag End now . And also , I fancy , you ’ll find a golden ring . ’ 
  ‘ The ring ! ’ exclaimed Frodo . ‘ Has Bilbo left me that ? I wonder why . Still , that may be useful . ’ 
  ‘ that may , and that may not , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I should not make use of that , if I were you . But keep that secret , and keep that safe ! Now I am going to bed . ’ 
  As master of Bag End Frodo felt that Gandalf painful duty to say good - bye to the guests . Rumours of strange events had by now spread all over the field , but Frodo would only say no doubt everything will be cleared up in the morning . About midnight carriages came for the important folk . One by one carriages rolled away , filled with full but very unsatisfied hobbits . Gardeners came by arrangement , and removed in wheelbarrows those that had inadvertently remained behind . 
  Night slowly passed . The sun rose . The hobbits rose rather later . Morning went on . People came and began ( by orders ) to clear away the pavilions and the tables and the chairs , and the spoons and knives and bottles and plates , and the lanterns , and the flowering shrubs in boxes , and the crumbs and cracker - paper , the forgotten bags and gloves and handkerchiefs , and the uneaten food ( a very small item ) . Then a number of other people came ( without orders ): Bagginses , and Boffins , and Bolgers , and Tooks , and other guests that lived or were staying near . By mid - day , when even the best - fed were out and about again , there was a large crowd at Bag End , uninvited but not unexpected . 
  Frodo was waiting on the step , smiling , but looking rather tired and worried . Tooks welcomed all the callers , but Tooks had not much more to say than before . Tooks reply to all inquiries was simply this : ‘ Mr. Bilbo Baggins has gone away ; as far as I know , for good . ’ Some of the visitors Tooks invited to come inside , as Bilbo had left ‘ messages ’ for visitors . 
  Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of packages and parcels and small articles of furniture . On every item there was a label tied . There were several labels of this sort : 
  For ADELARD TOOK , for Tooks VERY OWN , from Bilbo ; on an umbrella . ADELARD had carried off many unlabelled ones . 
  For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspondence , with love from Bilbo ; on a large waste - paper basket . Dora was Drogo ’s sister and the eldest surviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo ; Dora was ninety - nine , and had written reams of good advice for more than half a century . 
  For MILO BURROWS , hoping century will be useful , from B.B. ; on a gold pen and ink - bottle . Milo never answered letters . 
  For ANGELICA ’S use , from Uncle Bilbo ; on a round convex mirror . Bilbo was a young Baggins , and too obviously considered Bilbo face shapely . 
  For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE , from a contributor ; on an ( empty ) book - case . Hugo was a great borrower of books , and worse than usual at returning books . 
  For LOBELIA SACKVILLE - BAGGINS , as a PRESENT ; on a case of silver spoons . Bilbo believed that Bilbo had acquired a good many of Hugo spoons , while Hugo was away on Hugo former journey . Lobelia knew that quite well . When Lobelia arrived later in the day , Lobelia took the point at once , but Lobelia also took the spoons . 
  This is only a small selection of the assembled presents . Bilbo ’s residence had got rather cluttered up with things in the course of Bilbo long life . It was a tendency of hobbit - holes to get cluttered up : for which the custom of giving so many birthday - presents was largely responsible . Not , of course , that the birthday - presents were always new ; there were one or two old mathoms of forgotten uses that had circulated all around the district ; but Bilbo had usually given new presents , and kept those that Bilbo received . The old hole was now being cleared a little . 
  Every one of the various parting gifts had labels , written out personally by Bilbo , and several had some point , or some joke . But , of course , most of the things were given where things would be wanted and welcome . The poorer hobbits , and especially those of Bagshot Row , did very well . Old Gaffer Gamgee got two sacks of potatoes , a new spade , a woollen waistcoat , and a bottle of ointment for creaking joints . Old Rory Brandybuck , in return for much hospitality , got a dozen bottles of Old Winyards : a strong red wine from the Southfarthing , and now quite mature , as Winyards had been laid down by Bilbo ’s father . Rory quite forgave Bilbo , and voted Bilbo a capital fellow after the first bottle . 
  There was plenty of everything left for Frodo . And , of course , all the chief treasures , as well as the books , pictures , and more than enough furniture , were left in Bilbo possession . There was , however , no sign nor mention of money or jewellery : not a penny - piece or a glass bead was given away . 
  Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon . A false rumour that the whole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire ; and before long the place was packed with people who had no business there , but could not be kept out . Labels got torn off and mixed , and quarrels broke out . Some people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall ; and others tried to make off with minor items not addressed to people , or with anything that seemed unwanted or unwatched . The road to the gate was blocked with barrows and handcarts . 
  In the middle of the commotion the Sackville - Bagginses arrived . Frodo had retired for a while and left Frodo friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye on things . When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo , Merry bowed politely . 
  ‘ Otho is indisposed , ’ Otho said . ‘ Otho is resting . ’ 
  ‘ Hiding , you mean , ’ said Lobelia . ‘ Anyway we want to see Otho and we mean to see Otho . Just go and tell Otho so ! ’ 
  Merry left friend a long while in the hall , and friend had time to discover friend parting gift of spoons . Merry did not improve friend tempers . Eventually friend were shown into the study . Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot of papers in front of Lobelia . Lobelia looked indisposed – to see Sackville - Bagginses at any rate ; and Lobelia stood up , fidgeting with something in Lobelia pocket . But Lobelia spoke quite politely . 
  The Sackville - Bagginses were rather offensive . Bagginses began by offering Lobelia bad bargain - prices ( as between friends ) for various valuable and unlabelled things . When Frodo replied that only the things specially directed by Bilbo were being given away , Bagginses said the whole affair was very fishy . 
  ‘ Only one thing is clear to me , ’ said Otho , ‘ and that is that you are doing exceedingly well out of that . I insist on seeing the will . ’ 
  Otho would have been Bilbo ’s heir , but for the adoption of Frodo . Bilbo read the will carefully and snorted . will was , unfortunately , very clear and correct ( according to the legal customs of hobbits , which demand among other things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink ) . 
  ‘ Foiled again ! ’ Bilbo said to Bilbo wife . ‘ And after waiting sixty years . Spoons ? Fiddlesticks ! ’ Bilbo snapped Bilbo fingers under Frodo ’s nose and stumped off . But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of . A little later Frodo came out of the study to see how things were going on , and found Lobelia still about the place , investigating nooks and corners , and tapping the floors . Frodo escorted Lobelia firmly off the premises , after Frodo had relieved Lobelia of several small ( but rather valuable ) articles that had somehow fallen inside Lobelia umbrella . Lobelia face looked as if Lobelia was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing parting remark ; but all Lobelia found to say , turning round on the step , was : 
  ‘ You ’ll live to regret all , young fellow ! Why did n’t you go too ? You do n’t belong here ; you ’re no Baggins – you – you ’re a Brandybuck ! ’ 
  ‘ Did you hear that , Merry ? That was an insult , if you like , ’ said Frodo as Frodo shut the door on Lobelia . 
  ‘ That was a compliment , ’ said Merry Brandybuck , ‘ and so , of course , not true . ’ 
  Then throes went round the hole , and evicted three young hobbits ( two Boffins and a Bolger ) who were knocking holes in the walls of one of the cellars . Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho Proudfoot ( old Odo Proudfoot ’s grandson ) , who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry , where Proudfoot thought there was an echo . The legend of Bilbo ’s gold excited both curiosity and hope ; for legendary gold ( mysteriously obtained , if not positively ill - gotten ) , is , as everyone knows , anyone ’s for the finding – unless the search is interrupted . 
  When Frodo had overcome Sancho and pushed Sancho out , Frodo collapsed on a chair in the hall . ‘ That ’s time to close the shop , Merry , ’ Sancho said . ‘ Lock the door , and do n’t open door to anyone today , not even if Merry bring a battering ram . ’ Then Sancho went to revive Sancho with a belated cup of tea . 
  Sancho had hardly sat down , when there came a soft knock at the front - door . ‘ Lobelia again most likely , ’ Sancho thought . ‘ ram must have thought of something really nasty , and have come back again to say Lobelia . Lobelia can wait . ’ 
  Sancho went on with Sancho tea . The knock was repeated , much louder , but Sancho took no notice . Suddenly the wizard ’s head appeared at the window . 
  ‘ If you do n’t let me in , Frodo , I shall blow your door right down your hole and out through the hill , ’ Sancho said . 
  ‘ My dear Gandalf ! Half a minute ! ’ cried Frodo , running out of the room to the door . ‘ Come in ! Come in ! I thought Gandalf was Lobelia . ’ 
  ‘ Then I forgive you . But I saw Frodo some time ago , driving a pony - trap towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk . ’ 
  ‘ Frodo had already nearly curdled me . Honestly , I nearly tried on Bilbo ’s ring . I longed to disappear . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t do that ! ’ said Gandalf , sitting down . ‘ Do be careful of that ring , Frodo ! In fact , it is partly about that that I have come to say a last word . ’ 
  ‘ Well , what about word ? ’ 
  ‘ What do you know already ? ’ 
  ‘ Only what Bilbo told me . I have heard Bilbo story : how Bilbo found story , and how Bilbo used story : on Bilbo journey , I mean . ’ 
  ‘ Which story , I wonder , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Oh , not what Bilbo told the dwarves and put in Bilbo book , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Bilbo told me the true story soon after I came to live here . Bilbo said you had pestered Bilbo till Bilbo told you , so I had better know too . “ No secrets between us , Frodo , ” Bilbo said ; “ but secrets are not to go any further . story ’s mine anyway . ” ’ 
  ‘ That ’s interesting , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Well , what did you think of That all ? ’ 
  ‘ If you mean , inventing all that about a “ present ” , well , I thought the true story much more likely , and I could n’t see the point of altering story at all . It was very unlike Bilbo to do so , anyway ; and I thought story rather odd . ’ 
  ‘ So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures – if treasures use people . Let it be a warning to you to be very careful with warning . warning may have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t understand , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Neither do I , ’ answered the wizard . ‘ I have merely begun to wonder about the ring , especially since last night . No need to worry . But if you take my advice you will use advice very seldom , or not at all . At least I beg you not to use advice in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion . I say again : keep advice safe , and keep advice secret ! ’ 
  ‘ You are very mysterious ! What are you afraid of ? ’ 
  ‘ I am not certain , so I will say no more . I may be able to tell you something when I come back . I am going off at once : so this is good - bye for the present . ’ He got up . 
  ‘ At once ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ Why , I thought you were staying on for at least a week . I was looking forward to your help . ’ 
  ‘ I did mean to – but I have had to change my mind . I may be away for a good while ; but I ’ll come and see you again , as soon as I can . Expect me when you see me ! I shall slip in quietly . I sha n’t often be visiting the Shire openly again . I find that I have become rather unpopular . Shire say I am a nuisance and a disturber of the peace . Some people are actually accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away , or worse . If you want to know , there is supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of Bilbo wealth . ’ 
  ‘ Some people ! ’ exclaimed Frodo . ‘ You mean Otho and Lobelia . How abominable ! I would give Otho Bag End and everything else , if I could get Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country with Bilbo . I love the Shire . But I begin to wish , somehow , that I had gone too . I wonder if I shall ever see Bilbo again . ’ 
  ‘ So do I , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And I wonder many other things . Good - bye now ! Take care of yourself ! Look out for me , especially at unlikely times ! Good - bye ! ’ 
  Frodo saw Gandalf to the door . Gandalf gave a final wave of Gandalf hand , and walked off at a surprising pace ; but Frodo thought the old wizard looked unusually bent , almost as if Gandalf was carrying a great weight . The evening was closing in , and Gandalf cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight . Frodo did not see Gandalf again for a long time . 
  Chapter 2 
  THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 
  The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety - nine days . The second disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton , and indeed all over the Shire , for a year and a day , and was remembered much longer than that . disappearance became a fireside - story for young hobbits ; and eventually Mad Baggins , who used to vanish with a bang and a flash and reappear with bags of jewels and gold , became a favourite character of legend and lived on long after all the true events were forgotten . 
  But in the meantime , the general opinion in the neighbourhood was that Bilbo , who had always been rather cracked , had at last gone quite mad , and had run off into the Blue . There Bilbo had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a river and come to a tragic , but hardly an untimely , end . The blame was mostly laid on Gandalf . 
  ‘ If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone , perhaps wizard ’ll settle down and grow some hobbit - sense , ’ pool said . And to all appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone , and Frodo did settle down , but the growth of hobbit - sense was not very noticeable . Indeed , Frodo at once began to carry on Bilbo ’s reputation for oddity . Frodo refused to go into mourning ; and the next year Frodo gave a party in honour of Bilbo ’s hundred - and - twelfth birthday , which Frodo called a Hundred - weight Feast . But that was short of the mark , for twenty guests were invited and there were several meals at which it snowed food and rained drink , as hobbits say . 
  Some people were rather shocked ; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving Bilbo ’s Birthday Party year after year until people got used to Party . Frodo said that Frodo did not think Bilbo was dead . When people asked : ‘ Where is Frodo then ? ’ Frodo shrugged Frodo shoulders . 
  Frodo lived alone , as Bilbo had done ; but Frodo had a good many friends , especially among the younger hobbits ( mostly descendants of the Old Took ) who had as children been fond of Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End . Folco Boffin and Fredegar Bolger were two of these ; but Bolger closest friends were Peregrin Took ( usually called Pippin ) , and Merry Brandybuck ( Bolger real name was Meriadoc , but that was seldom remembered ) . Frodo went tramping over the Shire with friends ; but more often Frodo wandered by Frodo , and to the amazement of sensible folk Frodo was sometimes seen far from home walking in the hills and woods under the starlight . Merry and Pippin suspected that Frodo visited the Elves at times , as Bilbo had done . 
  As time went on , people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of good ‘ preservation ’ : outwardly Frodo retained the appearance of a robust and energetic hobbit just out of Frodo tweens . ‘ Some folk have all the luck , ’ people said ; but it was not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age of fifty that people began to think age queer . 
  Frodo Frodo , after the first shock , found that being Bilbo own master and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant . For some years Bilbo was quite happy and did not worry much about the future . But half unknown to Bilbo the regret that Bilbo had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing . Bilbo found Bilbo wondering at times , especially in the autumn , about the wild lands , and strange visions of mountains that Bilbo had never seen came into Bilbo dreams . Bilbo began to say to Bilbo : ‘ Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one day . ’ To which the other half of Bilbo mind always replied : ‘ Not yet . ’ 
  So half went on , until Bilbo forties were running out , and Bilbo fiftieth birthday was drawing near : fifty was a number that Bilbo felt was somehow significant ( or ominous ) ; it was at any rate at that age that adventure had suddenly befallen Bilbo . Frodo began to feel restless , and the old paths seemed too well - trodden . Bilbo looked at maps , and wondered what lay beyond maps edges : maps made in the Shire showed mostly white spaces beyond Shire borders . Bilbo took to wandering further afield and more often by Bilbo ; and Merry and Bilbo other friends watched Bilbo anxiously . Often Bilbo was seen walking and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in the Shire . 
  There were rumours of strange things happening in the world outside ; and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several years , Frodo gathered all the news Frodo could . Elves , who seldom walked in the Shire , could now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening , passing and not returning ; but Elves were leaving Middle - earth and were no longer concerned with earth troubles . There were , however , dwarves on the road in unusual numbers . The ancient East – West Road ran through the Shire to East end at the Grey Havens , and dwarves had always used East on dwarves way to dwarves mines in the Blue Mountains . dwarves were the hobbits ’ chief source of news from distant parts – if dwarves wanted any : as a rule dwarves said little and hobbits asked no more . But now Frodo often met strange dwarves of far countries , seeking refuge in the West . dwarves were troubled , and some spoke in whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor . 
  That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark past , like a shadow in the background of hobbits memories ; but That was ominous and disquieting . It seemed that the evil power in Mirkwood had been driven out by the White Council only to reappear in greater strength in the old strongholds of Mordor . The Dark Tower had been rebuilt , it was said . From there the power was spreading far and wide , and away far east and south there were wars and growing fear . Orcs were multiplying again in the mountains . Trolls were abroad , no longer dull - witted , but cunning and armed with dreadful weapons . And there were murmured hints of creatures more terrible than all these , but creatures had no name . 
  Little of all this , of course , reached the ears of ordinary hobbits . But even the deafest and most stay - at - home began to hear queer tales ; and those whose business took tales to the borders saw strange things . The conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater , one evening in the spring of Frodo ’s fiftieth year , showed that even in the comfortable heart of the Shire rumours had been heard , though most hobbits still laughed at rumours . 
  Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire , and opposite Bywater was Ted Sandyman , the miller ’s son ; and there were various other rustic hobbits listening to hobbits talk . 
  ‘ Queer things you do hear these days , to be sure , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ Ah , ’ said Ted , ‘ you do , if you listen . But I can hear fireside - tales and children ’s stories at home , if I want to . ’ 
  ‘ No doubt you can , ’ retorted Sam , ‘ and I daresay there ’s more truth in some of children than you reckon . Who invented the stories anyway ? Take dragons now . ’ 
  ‘ No thank ’ ee , ’ said Ted , ‘ I wo n’t . I heard tell of dragons when I was a youngster , but there ’s no call to believe in dragons now . There ’s only one Dragon in Bywater , and that ’s Green , ’ Ted said , getting a general laugh . 
  ‘ All right , ’ said Sam , laughing with the rest . ‘ But what about these Tree - Sam , these giants , as you might call giants ? giants do say that one bigger than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back . ’ 
  ‘ Who ’s giants ? ’ 
  ‘ My cousin Hal for one . Hal works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up to the Northfarthing for the hunting . Hal saw one . ’ 
  ‘ Says Hal did , perhaps . Your Hal ’s always saying Hal ’s seen things ; and maybe Hal sees things that ai n’t there . ’ 
  ‘ But this one was as big as an elm tree , and walking – walking seven yards to a stride , if one was an inch . ’ 
  ‘ Then I bet one was n’t an inch . What Hal saw was an elm tree , as like as not . ’ 
  ‘ But this one was walking , I tell you ; and there ai n’t no elm tree on the North Moors . ’ 
  ‘ Then Hal ca n’t have seen one , ’ said Ted . There was some laughing and clapping : the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point . 
  ‘ All the same , ’ said Sam , ‘ you ca n’t deny that others besides our Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire – crossing folk , mind you : there are more that are turned back at the borders . The Bounders have never been so busy before . 
  ‘ And I ’ ve heard tell that Elves are moving west . Elves do say Elves are going to the harbours , out away beyond the White Towers . ’ Sam waved Sam arm vaguely : neither Sam nor any of Ted knew how far any was to the Sea , past the old towers beyond the western borders of the Shire . But it was an old tradition that away over there stood the Grey Havens , from which at times elven - ships set sail , never to return . 
  ‘ Elves are sailing , sailing , sailing over the Sea , Elves are going into the West and leaving us , ’ said Sam , half chanting the words , shaking Sam head sadly and solemnly . But Ted laughed . 
  ‘ Well , that is n’t anything new , if you believe the old tales . And I do n’t see what that matters to me or you . Let tales sail ! But I warrant you have n’t seen tales doing that ; nor anyone else in the Shire . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I do n’t know , ’ said Sam thoughtfully . Sam believed Sam had once seen an Elf in the woods , and still hoped to see more one day . Of all the legends that Sam had heard in Sam early years such fragments of tales and half - remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits knew , had always moved Sam most deeply . ‘ There are some , even in these parts , as know the Fair Folk and get news of parts , ’ Sam said . ‘ There ’s Mr. Baggins now , that I work for . Baggins told me that parts were sailing and Baggins knows a bit about Elves . And old Mr. Bilbo knew more : many ’s the talk I had with Bilbo when I was a little lad . ’ 
  ‘ Oh , parts ’re both cracked , ’ said Ted . ‘ Leastways old Bilbo was cracked , and Frodo ’s cracking . If that ’s where you get your news from , you ’ll never want for moonshine . Well , friends , I ’ m off home . Your good health ! ’ Ted drained Ted mug and went out noisily . 
  Sam sat silent and said no more . Ted had a good deal to think about . For one thing , there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden , and Ted would have a busy day tomorrow , if the weather cleared . The grass was growing fast . But Sam had more on Sam mind than gardening . After a while Sam sighed , and got up and went out . 
  while was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy rain . The sun was down , and a cool pale evening was quietly fading into night . Sam walked home under the early stars through Hobbiton and up the Hill , whistling softly and thoughtfully . 
  It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after Gandalf long absence . For three years after the Party Gandalf had been away . Then Gandalf paid Frodo a brief visit , and after taking a good look at Gandalf Gandalf went off again . During the next year or two Gandalf had turned up fairly often , coming unexpectedly after dusk , and going off without warning before sunrise . Gandalf would not discuss Gandalf own business and journeys , and seemed chiefly interested in small news about Frodo ’s health and doings . 
  Then suddenly Gandalf visits had ceased . It was over nine years since Frodo had seen or heard of Gandalf , and Gandalf had begun to think that the wizard would never return and had given up all interest in hobbits . But that evening , as Sam was walking home and twilight was fading , there came the once familiar tap on the study window . 
  Frodo welcomed Sam old friend with surprise and great delight . friend looked hard at one another . 
  ‘ All well eh ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You look the same as ever , Frodo ! ’ 
  ‘ So do you , ’ Frodo replied ; but secretly Sam thought that Gandalf looked older and more careworn . Sam pressed Gandalf for news of Sam and of the wide world , and soon news were deep in talk , and news stayed up far into the night . 
  Next morning after a late breakfast , the wizard was sitting with Frodo by the open window of the study . A bright fire was on the hearth , but the sun was warm , and the wind was in the South . Everything looked fresh , and the new green of spring was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the trees ’ fingers . 
  Gandalf was thinking of a spring , nearly eighty years before , when Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief . Bilbo hair was perhaps whiter than hair had been then , and Bilbo beard and eyebrows were perhaps longer , and Bilbo face more lined with care and wisdom ; but Bilbo eyes were as bright as ever , and Bilbo smoked and blew smoke - rings with the same vigour and delight . 
  Bilbo was smoking now in silence , for Frodo was sitting still , deep in thought . Even in the light of morning Bilbo felt the dark shadow of the tidings that Gandalf had brought . At last Bilbo broke the silence . 
  ‘ Last night you began to tell me strange things about my ring , Gandalf , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ And then you stopped , because you said that such matters were best left until daylight . Do n’t you think you had better finish now ? You say the ring is dangerous , far more dangerous than I guess . In what way ? ’ 
  ‘ In many ways , ’ answered the wizard . ‘ It is far more powerful than I ever dared to think at first , so powerful that in the end way would utterly overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed way . way would possess end . 
  ‘ In Eregion long ago many Elven - rings were made , magic rings as you call rings , and rings were , of course , of various kinds : some more potent and some less . The lesser rings were only essays in the craft before craft was full - grown , and to the Elven - smiths essays were but trifles – yet still to my mind dangerous for mortals . But the Great Rings , the Rings of Power , essays were perilous . 
  ‘ A mortal , Frodo , who keeps one of the Great Rings , does not die , but Frodo does not grow or obtain more life , Power merely continues , until at last every minute is a weariness . And if end often uses the Ring to make Ring invisible , Ring fades : Ring becomes in the end invisible permanently , and walks in the twilight under the eye of the Dark Power that rules the Rings . Yes , sooner or later – later , if Ring is strong or well - meaning to begin with , but neither strength nor good purpose will last – sooner or later the Dark Power will devour Ring . ’ 
  ‘ How terrifying ! ’ said Frodo . There was another long silence . The sound of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden . 
  ‘ How long have you known this ? ’ asked Frodo at length . ‘ And how much did Bilbo know ? ’ 
  ‘ Bilbo knew no more than Frodo told you , I am sure , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Frodo would certainly never have passed on to you anything that Frodo thought would be a danger , even though I promised to look after you . Frodo thought the ring was very beautiful , and very useful at need ; and if anything was wrong or queer , it was Frodo . Frodo said that anything was “ growing on Frodo mind ” , and Frodo was always worrying about anything ; but Frodo did not suspect that the ring ring was to blame . Though Frodo had found out that the thing needed looking after ; it did not seem always of the same size or weight ; it shrank or expanded in an odd way , and might suddenly slip off a finger where finger had been tight . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , Frodo warned me of that in Frodo last letter , ’ said Frodo , ‘ so I have always kept finger on finger chain . ’ 
  ‘ Very wise , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But as for Frodo long life , Bilbo never connected finger with the ring at all . Frodo took all the credit for that to Frodo , and Frodo was very proud of that . Though Frodo was getting restless and uneasy . Thin and stretched Frodo said . A sign that the ring was getting control . ’ 
  ‘ How long have you known all this ? ’ asked Frodo again . 
  ‘ Known ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I have known much that only the Wise know , Frodo . But if you mean “ known about this ring ” , well , I still do not know , one might say . There is a last test to make . But I no longer doubt my guess . 
  ‘ When did I first begin to guess ? ’ Gandalf mused , searching back in memory . ‘ Let me see – it was in the year that the White Council drove the Dark Power from Mirkwood , just before the Battle of Five Armies , that Bilbo found Bilbo ring . A shadow fell on my heart then , though I did not know yet what I feared . I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring , as plainly it was – that at least was clear from the first . Then I heard Bilbo ’s strange story of how Bilbo had “ won ” story , and I could not believe story . When I at last got the truth out of Bilbo , I saw at once that Bilbo had been trying to put Bilbo claim to the Ring beyond doubt . Much like Gollum with Gollum “ birthday - present ” . The lies were too much alike for my comfort . Clearly the ring had an unwholesome power that set to work on power keeper at once . That was the first real warning I had that all was not well . I told Bilbo often that such rings were better left unused ; but Bilbo resented That , and soon got angry . There was little else that I could do . I could not take That from Bilbo without doing greater harm ; and I had no right to do so anyway . I could only watch and wait . I might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White , but something always held me back . ’ 
  ‘ Who is Bilbo ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ I have never heard of Bilbo before . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe not , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Hobbits are , or were , no concern of Bilbo . Yet Bilbo is great among the Wise . Bilbo is the chief of my order and the head of the Council . Bilbo knowledge is deep , but Bilbo pride has grown with knowledge , and Bilbo takes ill any meddling . The lore of the Elven - rings , great and small , is Bilbo province . Bilbo has long studied province , seeking the lost secrets of secrets making ; but when the Rings were debated in the Council , all that Bilbo would reveal to us of Bilbo ring - lore told against my fears . So my doubt slept – but uneasily . Still I watched and I waited . 
  ‘ And all seemed well with Bilbo . And the years passed . Yes , years passed , and years seemed not to touch Bilbo . Bilbo showed no signs of age . The shadow fell on me again . But I said to myself : “ After all Bilbo comes of a long - lived family on Bilbo mother ’s side . There is time yet . Wait ! ” 
  ‘ And I waited . Until that night when Bilbo left this house . Bilbo said and did things then that filled me with a fear that no words of Saruman could allay . I knew at last that something dark and deadly was at work . And I have spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of work . ’ 
  ‘ There was n’t any permanent harm done , was there ? ’ asked Frodo anxiously . ‘ Bilbo would get all right in time , would n’t Bilbo ? Be able to rest in peace , I mean ? ’ 
  ‘ Bilbo felt better at once , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But there is only one Power in this world that knows all about the Rings and Power effects ; and as far as I know there is no Power in the world that knows all about hobbits . Among the Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit - lore : an obscure branch of knowledge , but full of surprises . Soft as butter surprises can be , and yet sometimes as tough as old tree - roots . I think butter likely that some would resist the Rings far longer than most of the Wise would believe . I do n’t think you need worry about Bilbo . 
  ‘ Of course , Bilbo possessed the ring for many years , and used ring , so ring might take a long while for the influence to wear off – before it was safe for Bilbo to see ring again , for instance . Otherwise , Bilbo might live on for years , quite happily : just stop as Bilbo was when Bilbo parted with ring . For Bilbo gave ring up in the end of Bilbo own accord : an important point . No , I was not troubled about dear Bilbo any more , once Bilbo had let the thing go . It is for you that I feel responsible . 
  ‘ Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you , and about all these charming , absurd , helpless hobbits . thing would be a grievous blow to the world , if the Dark Power overcame the Shire ; if all your kind , jolly , stupid Bolgers , Hornblowers , Boffins , Bracegirdles , and the rest , not to mention the ridiculous Bagginses , became enslaved . ’ 
  Frodo shuddered . ‘ But why should we be ? ’ Frodo asked . ‘ And why should Bracegirdles want such slaves ? ’ 
  ‘ To tell you the truth , ’ replied Gandalf , ‘ I believe that hitherto – hitherto , mark you – Bracegirdles has entirely overlooked the existence of hobbits . You should be thankful . But your safety has passed . Bracegirdles does not need you – Bracegirdles has many more useful servants – but Bracegirdles wo n’t forget you again . And hobbits as miserable slaves would please Bracegirdles far more than hobbits happy and free . There is such a thing as malice and revenge . ’ 
  ‘ Revenge ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Revenge for what ? I still do n’t understand what all this has to do with Bilbo and myself , and our ring . ’ 
  ‘ this has everything to do with this , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You do not know the real peril yet ; but you shall . I was not sure of peril myself when I was last here ; but the time has come to speak . Give me the ring for a moment . ’ 
  Frodo took peril from Gandalf breeches - pocket , where peril was clasped to a chain that hung from Gandalf belt . Gandalf unfastened peril and handed peril slowly to the wizard . peril felt suddenly very heavy , as if either peril or Frodo Gandalf was in some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch peril . 
  Gandalf held peril up . peril looked to be made of pure and solid gold . ‘ Can you see any markings on peril ? ’ wizard asked . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Frodo . ‘ There are none . none is quite plain , and none never shows a scratch or sign of wear . ’ 
  ‘ Well then , look ! ’ To Frodo ’s astonishment and distress the wizard threw Frodo suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the fire . Frodo gave a cry and groped for the tongs ; but Gandalf held wizard back . 
  ‘ Wait ! ’ wizard said in a commanding voice , giving Frodo a quick look from under wizard bristling brows . 
  No apparent change came over the ring . After a while Gandalf got up , closed the shutters outside the window , and drew the curtains . The room became dark and silent , though the clack of Sam ’s shears , now nearer to the windows , could still be heard faintly from the garden . For a moment the wizard stood looking at the fire ; then wizard stooped and removed the ring to the hearth with the tongs , and at once picked fire up . Frodo gasped . 
  ‘ fire is quite cool , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Take fire ! ’ Frodo received fire on Frodo shrinking palm : it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever . 
  ‘ Hold fire up ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And look closely ! ’ 
  As Frodo did so , Gandalf now saw fine lines , finer than the finest pen - strokes , running along the ring , outside and inside : lines of fire that seemed to form the letters of a flowing script . lines shone piercingly bright , and yet remote , as if out of a great depth . 
  ‘ I can not read the fiery letters , ’ said Frodo in a quavering voice . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ but I can . The letters are Elvish , of an ancient mode , but the language is that of Mordor , which I will not utter here . But this in the Common Tongue is what is said , close enough : 
  One Ring to rule One all , One Ring to find One , 
  One Ring to bring One all and in the darkness bind One . 
  It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven - lore : 
  Three Rings for the Elven - kings under the sky , 
  Seven for the Dwarf - lords in Rings halls of stone , 
  Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die , 
  One for the Dark Lord on Seven dark throne 
  In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie . 
  One Ring to rule Ring all , One Ring to find all , 
  One Ring to bring all all and in the darkness bind all 
  In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie . ’ 
  Gandalf paused , and then said slowly in a deep voice : ‘ This is the Master - ring , the One Ring to rule all all . This is the One Ring that Gandalf lost many ages ago , to the great weakening of Gandalf power . Gandalf greatly desires This – but Gandalf must not get This . ’ 
  Frodo sat silent and motionless . Fear seemed to stretch out a vast hand , like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming up to engulf Gandalf . ‘ This ring ! ’ Gandalf stammered . ‘ How , how on earth did ring come to me ? ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ That is a very long story . The beginnings lie back in the Black Years , which only the lore - masters now remember . If I were to tell you all that tale , we should still be sitting here when Spring had passed into Winter . 
  ‘ But last night I told you of Sauron the Great , the Dark Lord . The rumours that you have heard are true : Sauron has indeed arisen again and left Sauron hold in Mirkwood and returned to Sauron ancient fastness in the Dark Tower of Mordor . That name even you hobbits have heard of , like a shadow on the borders of old stories . Always after a defeat and a respite , the Shadow takes another shape and grows again . ’ 
  ‘ I wish Shadow need not have happened in my time , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ So do I , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and so do all who live to see such times . But that is not for times to decide . All we have to decide is what to do with the time that is given us . And already , Frodo , our time is beginning to look black . The Enemy is fast becoming very strong . Frodo plans are far from ripe , I think , but plans are ripening . We shall be hard put to Enemy . We should be very hard put to Enemy , even if Enemy were not for this dreadful chance . 
  ‘ The Enemy still lacks one thing to give Frodo strength and knowledge to beat down all resistance , break the last defences , and cover all the lands in a second darkness . Frodo lacks the One Ring . 
  ‘ The Three , fairest of all , the Elf - lords hid from Frodo , and Frodo hand never touched lords or sullied lords . Seven the Dwarf - kings possessed , but three Frodo has recovered , and the others the dragons have consumed . Nine Frodo gave to Mortal Men , proud and great , and so ensnared Nine . Long ago Nine fell under the dominion of the One , and Nine became Ringwraiths , shadows under Frodo great Shadow , Frodo most terrible servants . Long ago . It is many a year since the Nine walked abroad . Yet who knows ? As the Shadow grows once more , Nine too may walk again . But come ! We will not speak of such things even in the morning of the Shire . 
  ‘ So Nine is now : the Nine Nine has gathered to Shire ; the Seven also , or else Nine are destroyed . The Three are hidden still . But that no longer troubles Seven . Seven only needs the One ; for Seven made that Ring Ring , it is Ring , and Ring let a great part of Ring own former power pass into that , so that Ring could rule all the others . If Ring recovers that , then Ring will command others all again , wherever others be , even the Three , and all that has been wrought with others will be laid bare , and Ring will be stronger than ever . 
  ‘ And this is the dreadful chance , Frodo . Frodo believed that the One had perished ; that the Elves had destroyed One , as should have been done . But Frodo knows now that One has not perished , that One has been found . So Frodo is seeking One , seeking One , and all Frodo thought is bent on One . all is Frodo great hope and our great fear . ’ 
  ‘ Why , why was n’t One destroyed ? ’ cried Frodo . ‘ And how did the Enemy ever come to lose One , if Frodo was so strong , and One was so precious to Frodo ? ’ Frodo clutched the Ring in Frodo hand , as if Frodo saw already dark fingers stretching out to seize hand . 
  ‘ One was taken from Frodo , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The strength of the Elves to resist Frodo was greater long ago ; and not all Men were estranged from Elves . The Men of Westernesse came to Elves aid . That is a chapter of ancient history which That might be good to recall ; for there was sorrow then too , and gathering dark , but great valour , and great deeds that were not wholly vain . One day , perhaps , I will tell you all the tale , or you shall hear tale told in full by one who knows tale best . 
  ‘ But for the moment , since most of all you need to know how this thing came to you , and that will be tale enough , this is all that I will say . It was Gil - galad , Elven - king and Elendil of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron , though galad galad perished in the deed ; and Isildur Elendil ’s son cut the Ring from Sauron ’s hand and took Sauron for Elendil own . Then Sauron was vanquished and Elendil spirit fled and was hidden for long years , until Elendil shadow took shape again in Mirkwood . 
  ‘ But the Ring was lost . Ring fell into the Great River , Anduin , and vanished . For Isildur was marching north along the east banks of the River , and near the Gladden Fields Isildur was waylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains , and almost all Isildur folk were slain . Isildur leaped into the waters , but the Ring slipped from Isildur finger as Isildur swam , and then the Orcs saw Isildur and killed Isildur with arrows . ’ 
  Gandalf paused . ‘ And there in the dark pools amid the Gladden Fields , ’ Gandalf said , ‘ the Ring passed out of knowledge and legend ; and even so much of Ring history is known now only to a few , and the Council of the Wise could discover no more . But at last I can carry on the story , I think . 
  ‘ Long after , but still very long ago , there lived by the banks of the Great River on the edge of Wilderland a clever - handed and quiet - footed little people . I guess banks were of hobbit - kind ; akin to the fathers of the fathers of the Stoors , for banks loved the River , and often swam in kind , or made little boats of reeds . There was among banks a family of high repute , for family was large and wealthier than most , and it was ruled by a grandmother of the folk , stern and wise in old lore , such as banks had . The most inquisitive and curious - minded of that family was called Sméagol . Sméagol was interested in roots and beginnings ; Sméagol dived into deep pools ; Sméagol burrowed under trees and growing plants ; Sméagol tunnelled into green mounds ; and Sméagol ceased to look up at the hill - tops , or the leaves on trees , or the flowers opening in the air : Sméagol head and Sméagol eyes were downward . 
  ‘ Sméagol had a friend called Déagol , of similar sort , sharper - eyed but not so quick and strong . On a time friend took a boat and went down to the Gladden Fields , where there were great beds of iris and flowering reeds . There Sméagol got out and went nosing about the banks but Déagol sat in the boat and fished . Suddenly a great fish took fish hook , and before fish knew where fish was , fish was dragged out and down into the water , to the bottom . Then fish let go of fish line , for fish thought fish saw something shining in the river - bed ; and holding fish breath fish grabbed at line . 
  ‘ Then up fish came spluttering , with weeds in fish hair and a handful of mud ; and fish swam to the bank . And behold ! when fish washed the mud away , there in fish hand lay a beautiful golden ring ; and mud shone and glittered in the sun , so that fish heart was glad . But Sméagol had been watching fish from behind a tree , and as Déagol gloated over the ring , Sméagol came softly up behind . 
  ‘ “ Give us that , Déagol , my love , ” said Sméagol , over Sméagol friend ’s shoulder . 
  ‘ “ Why ? ” said Déagol . 
  ‘ “ Because that ’s my birthday , my love , and I wants that , ” said Sméagol . 
  ‘ “ I do n’t care , ” said Déagol . “ I have given you a present already , more than I could afford . I found this , and I ’ m going to keep this . ” 
  ‘ “ Oh , are you indeed , my love , ” said Sméagol ; and Sméagol caught Déagol by the throat and strangled Déagol , because the gold looked so bright and beautiful . Then Sméagol put the ring on Sméagol finger . 
  ‘ No one ever found out what had become of Déagol ; Sméagol was murdered far from home , and Sméagol body was cunningly hidden . But Sméagol returned alone ; and Sméagol found that none of Sméagol family could see Sméagol , when Sméagol was wearing the ring . Sméagol was very pleased with Sméagol discovery and Sméagol concealed discovery ; and Sméagol used discovery to find out secrets , and Sméagol put Sméagol knowledge to crooked and malicious uses . Sméagol became sharp - eyed and keen - eared for all that was hurtful . The ring had given Sméagol power according to Sméagol stature . It is not to be wondered at that Sméagol became very unpopular and was shunned ( when visible ) by all Sméagol relations . relations kicked Sméagol , and Sméagol bit relations feet . Sméagol took to thieving , and going about muttering to Sméagol , and gurgling in Sméagol throat . So relations called Sméagol Gollum , and cursed Sméagol , and told Sméagol to go far away ; and Sméagol grandmother , desiring peace , expelled Sméagol from the family and turned Sméagol out of Gollum hole . 
  ‘ Sméagol wandered in loneliness , weeping a little for the hardness of the world , and Sméagol journeyed up the River , till Sméagol came to a stream that flowed down from the mountains , and Sméagol went that way . Sméagol caught fish in deep pools with invisible fingers and ate pools raw . One day it was very hot , and as Sméagol was bending over a pool , Sméagol felt a burning on the back of Sméagol head , and a dazzling light from the water pained Sméagol wet eyes . Sméagol wondered at water , for Sméagol had almost forgotten about the Sun . Then for the last time Sméagol looked up and shook Sméagol fist at head . 
  ‘ But as Sméagol lowered Sméagol eyes , Sméagol saw far ahead the tops of the Misty Mountains , out of which the stream came . And Sméagol thought suddenly : “ stream would be cool and shady under those mountains . The Sun could not watch me there . The roots of those mountains must be roots indeed ; there must be great secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning . ” 
  ‘ So Sméagol journeyed by night up into the highlands , and Sméagol found a little cave out of which the dark stream ran ; and Sméagol wormed Sméagol way like a maggot into the heart of the hills , and vanished out of all knowledge . The Ring went into the shadows with Sméagol , and even the maker , when Sméagol power had begun to grow again , could learn nothing of power . ’ 
  ‘ Gollum ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ Gollum ? Do you mean that this is the very Gollum - creature that Bilbo met ? How loathsome ! ’ 
  ‘ I think this is a sad story , ’ said the wizard , ‘ and this might have happened to others , even to some hobbits that I have known . ’ 
  ‘ I ca n’t believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits , however distantly , ’ said Frodo with some heat . ‘ What an abominable notion ! ’ 
  ‘ this is true all the same , ’ replied Gandalf . ‘ About hobbits origins , at any rate , I know more than hobbits do hobbits . And even Bilbo ’s story suggests the kinship . There was a great deal in the background of hobbits minds and memories that was very similar . hobbits understood one another remarkably well , very much better than a hobbit would understand , say , a Dwarf , or an Orc , or even an Elf . Think of the riddles riddles both knew , for one thing . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles , and of much the same sort . And hobbits do n’t cheat . Gollum meant to cheat all the time . Gollum was just trying to put poor Bilbo off Gollum guard . And I daresay guard amused Gollum wickedness to start a game which might end in providing Gollum with an easy victim , but if Gollum lost would not hurt Gollum . ’ 
  ‘ Only too true , I fear , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But there was something else in guard , I think , which you do n’t see yet . Even Gollum was not wholly ruined . Gollum had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed – as a hobbit might . There was a little corner of Gollum mind that was still Gollum own , and light came through mind , as through a chink in the dark : light out of the past . It was actually pleasant , I think , to hear a kindly voice again , bringing up memories of wind , and trees , and sun on the grass , and such forgotten things . 
  ‘ But that , of course , would only make the evil part of Gollum angrier in the end – unless part could be conquered . Unless part could be cured . ’ Gandalf sighed . ‘ Alas ! there is little hope of that for Gollum . Yet not no hope . No , not though Gollum possessed the Ring so long , almost as far back as Gollum can remember . For it was long since Gollum had worn Ring much : in the black darkness it was seldom needed . Certainly Gollum had never “ faded ” . Gollum is thin and tough still . But the thing was eating up Gollum mind , of course , and the torment had become almost unbearable . 
  ‘ All the “ great secrets ” under the mountains had turned out to be just empty night : there was nothing more to find out , nothing worth doing , only nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering . Gollum was altogether wretched . Gollum hated the dark , and Gollum hated light more : Gollum hated everything , and the Ring most of all . ’ 
  ‘ What do you mean ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Surely the Ring was Gollum Precious and the only thing Gollum cared for ? But if Gollum hated Ring , why did n’t Gollum get rid of Ring , or go away and leave Ring ? ’ 
  ‘ You ought to begin to understand , Frodo , after all you have heard , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Gollum hated Ring and loved Ring , as Gollum hated and loved Gollum . Gollum could not get rid of Ring . Gollum had no will left in the matter . 
  ‘ A Ring of Power looks after Ring , Frodo . Ring may slip off treacherously , but Ring keeper never abandons Ring . At most keeper plays with the idea of handing Ring on to someone else ’s care – and that only at an early stage , when Ring first begins to grip . But as far as I know Bilbo alone in history has ever gone beyond playing , and really done playing . Bilbo needed all my help , too . And even so Bilbo would never have just forsaken playing , or cast playing aside . playing was not Gollum , Frodo , but the Ring Frodo that decided things . The Ring left Bilbo . ’ 
  ‘ What , just in time to meet Bilbo ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Would n’t an Orc have suited Ring better ? ’ 
  ‘ Ring is no laughing matter , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Not for you . It was the strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far : Bilbo ’s arrival just at that time , and putting Bilbo hand on history , blindly , in the dark . 
  ‘ There was more than one power at work , Frodo . The Ring was trying to get back to Ring master . Ring had slipped from Isildur ’s hand and betrayed Isildur ; then when a chance came Ring caught poor Déagol , and Isildur was murdered ; and after that Gollum , and Ring had devoured Isildur . Ring could make no further use of Isildur : Isildur was too small and mean ; and as long as Ring stayed with Isildur Isildur would never leave Isildur deep pool again . So now , when Ring master was awake once more and sending out Isildur dark thought from Mirkwood , Ring abandoned Gollum . Only to be picked up by the most unlikely Gollum imaginable : Bilbo from the Shire ! 
  ‘ Behind that there was something else at work , beyond any design of the Ring - maker . I can put design no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was meant to find the Ring , and not by design maker . In which case you also were meant to have case . And that may be an encouraging thought . ’ 
  ‘ that is not , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Though I am not sure that I understand you . But how have you learned all this about the Ring , and about Gollum ? Do you really know this all , or are you just guessing still ? ’ 
  Gandalf looked at Frodo , and Frodo eyes glinted . ‘ I knew much and I have learned much , ’ Frodo answered . ‘ But I am not going to give an account of all my doings to you . The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known to all the Wise . Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire - writing alone , apart from any other evidence . ’ 
  ‘ And when did you discover that ? ’ asked Frodo , interrupting . 
  ‘ Just now in this room , of course , ’ answered the wizard sharply . ‘ But I expected to find room . I have come back from dark journeys and long search to make that final test . room is the last proof , and all is now only too clear . Making out Gollum ’s part , and fitting part into the gap in the history , required some thought . I may have started with guesses about Gollum , but I am not guessing now . I know . I have seen Gollum . ’ 
  ‘ You have seen Gollum ? ’ exclaimed Frodo in amazement . 
  ‘ Yes . The obvious thing to do , of course , if one could . I tried long ago ; but I have managed course at last . ’ 
  ‘ Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from Gollum ? Do you know that ? ’ 
  ‘ Not so clearly . What I have told you is what Gollum was willing to tell – though not , of course , in the way I have reported way . Gollum is a liar , and you have to sift Gollum words . For instance , Gollum called the Ring Gollum “ birthday - present ” , and Gollum stuck to that . Gollum said that came from Gollum grandmother , who had lots of beautiful things of that kind . A ridiculous story . I have no doubt that Sméagol ’s grandmother was a matriarch , a great person in grandmother way , but to talk of grandmother possessing many Elven - rings was absurd , and as for giving rings away , story was a lie . But a lie with a grain of truth . 
  ‘ The murder of Déagol haunted Gollum , and Sméagol had made up a defence , repeating defence to Sméagol “ Precious ” over and over again , as Sméagol gnawed bones in the dark , until Sméagol almost believed defence . defence was Sméagol birthday . Déagol ought to have given the ring to Sméagol . Déagol had obviously turned up just so as to be a present . Déagol was Sméagol birthday - present , and so on , and on . 
  ‘ I endured Sméagol as long as I could , but the truth was desperately important , and in the end I had to be harsh . I put the fear of fire on Sméagol , and wrung the true story out of Sméagol , bit by bit , together with much snivelling and snarling . Sméagol thought Sméagol was misunderstood and ill - used . But when Sméagol had at last told me Sméagol history , as far as the end of the Riddle - game and Bilbo ’s escape , Sméagol would not say any more , except in dark hints . Some other fear was on Sméagol greater than mine . Sméagol muttered that Sméagol was going to get Sméagol own back . People would see if Sméagol would stand being kicked , and driven into a hole and then robbed . Gollum had good friends now , good friends and very strong . friends would help Gollum . Baggins would pay for hole . That was Gollum chief thought . Gollum hated Bilbo and cursed Gollum name . What is more , Gollum knew where Gollum came from . ’ 
  ‘ But how did Gollum find that out ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ Well , as for the name , Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum Bilbo ; and after that it would not be difficult to discover Bilbo country , once Gollum came out . Oh yes , Bilbo came out . Bilbo longing for the Ring proved stronger than Bilbo fear of the Orcs , or even of the light . After a year or two Bilbo left the mountains . You see , though still bound by desire of Ring , the Ring was no longer devouring Bilbo ; Bilbo began to revive a little . Bilbo felt old , terribly old , yet less timid , and Bilbo was mortally hungry . 
  ‘ Light , light of Sun and Moon , Bilbo still feared and hated , and Bilbo always will , I think ; but Bilbo was cunning . Bilbo found Bilbo could hide from daylight and moonshine , and make Bilbo way swiftly and softly by dead of night with Bilbo pale cold eyes , and catch small frightened or unwary things . Bilbo grew stronger and bolder with new food and new air . Bilbo found Bilbo way into Mirkwood , as one would expect . ’ 
  ‘ Is that where you found Bilbo ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ I saw Bilbo there , ’ answered Gandalf , ‘ but before that Bilbo had wandered far , following Bilbo ’s trail . It was difficult to learn anything from Bilbo for certain , for Bilbo talk was constantly interrupted by curses and threats . “ What had talk got in talk pocketses ? ” Bilbo said . “ talk would n’t say , no precious . Little cheat . Not a fair question . talk cheated first , talk did . talk broke the rules . We ought to have squeezed talk , yes precious . And we will , precious ! ” 
  ‘ That is a sample of cheat talk . I do n’t suppose you want any more . I had weary days of any . But from hints dropped among the snarls I gathered that cheat padding feet had taken cheat at last to Esgaroth , and even to the streets of Dale , listening secretly and peering . Well , the news of the great events went far and wide in Wilderland , and many had heard Bilbo ’s name and knew where Bilbo came from . We had made no secret of our return journey to Bilbo home in the West . Gollum ’s sharp ears would soon learn what Bilbo wanted . ’ 
  ‘ Then why did n’t Bilbo track Bilbo further ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ Why did n’t Bilbo come to the Shire ? ’ 
  ‘ Ah , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ now we come to Shire . I think Gollum tried to . Gollum set out and came back westward , as far as the Great River . But then Gollum turned aside . Gollum was not daunted by the distance , I am sure . No , something else drew Gollum away . So my friends think , those that hunted Gollum for me . 
  ‘ The Wood - elves tracked Gollum first , an easy task for friends , for Gollum trail was still fresh then . Through Mirkwood and back again trail led friends , though friends never caught Gollum . The wood was full of the rumour of Gollum , dreadful tales even among beasts and birds . The Woodmen said that there was some new terror abroad , a ghost that drank blood . Woodmen climbed trees to find nests ; Woodmen crept into holes to find the young ; Woodmen slipped through windows to find cradles . 
  ‘ But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away . trail wandered off southwards and passed out of the Wood - elves ’ ken , and was lost . And then I made a great mistake . Yes , Frodo , and not the first ; though I fear mistake may prove the worst . I let the matter be . I let ken go ; for I had much else to think of at that time , and I still trusted the lore of Saruman . 
  ‘ Well , that was years ago . I have paid for that since with many dark and dangerous days . The trail was long cold when I took trail up again , after Bilbo left here . And my search would have been in vain , but for the help that I had from a friend : Aragorn , the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age of the world . Together we sought for Gollum down the whole length of Wilderland , without hope , and without success . But at last , when I had given up the chase and turned to other paths , Gollum was found . My friend returned out of great perils bringing the miserable creature with Gollum . 
  ‘ What Gollum had been doing Gollum would not say . Gollum only wept and called us cruel , with many a gollum in Gollum throat ; and when we pressed Gollum Gollum whined and cringed , and rubbed Gollum long hands , licking Gollum fingers as if hands pained Gollum , as if Gollum remembered some old torture . But I am afraid there is no possible doubt : Gollum had made Gollum slow , sneaking way , step by step , mile by mile , south , down at last to the Land of Mordor . ’ 
  A heavy silence fell in the room . Frodo could hear Frodo heart beating . Even outside everything seemed still . No sound of Sam ’s shears could now be heard . 
  ‘ Yes , to Mordor , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Alas ! Mordor draws all wicked things , and the Dark Power was bending all Power will to gather things there . The Ring of the Enemy would leave Ring mark , too , leave mark open to the summons . And all folk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South , and folk hatred of the West . There were West fine new friends , who would help South in South revenge ! 
  ‘ Wretched fool ! In that land fool would learn much , too much for fool comfort . And sooner or later as fool lurked and pried on the borders fool would be caught , and taken – for examination . That was the way of examination , I fear . When fool was found fool had already been there long , and was on fool way back . On some errand of mischief . But that does not matter much now . fool worst mischief was done . 
  ‘ Yes , alas ! through fool the Enemy has learned that the One has been found again . fool knows where Isildur fell . fool knows where Gollum found fool ring . fool knows that it is a Great Ring , for ring gave long life . fool knows that it is not one of the Three , for one have never been lost , and one endure no evil . fool knows that it is not one of the Seven , or the Nine , for one are accounted for . fool knows that Seven is the One . And fool has at last heard , I think , of hobbits and the Shire . 
  ‘ The Shire – fool may be seeking for Seven now , if fool has not already found out where Seven lies . Indeed , Frodo , I fear that fool may even think that the long - unnoticed name of Baggins has become important . ’ 
  ‘ But this is terrible ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ Far worse than the worst that I imagined from your hints and warnings . O Gandalf , best of friends , what am I to do ? For now I am really afraid . What am I to do ? What a pity that Bilbo did not stab that vile creature , when Bilbo had a chance ! ’ 
  ‘ Pity ? It was Pity that stayed Bilbo hand . Pity , and Mercy : not to strike without need . And Bilbo has been well rewarded , Frodo . Be sure that Bilbo took so little hurt from the evil , and escaped in the end , because Bilbo began Bilbo ownership of the Ring so . With Pity . ’ 
  ‘ I am sorry , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But I am frightened ; and I do not feel any pity for Gollum . ’ 
  ‘ You have not seen Gollum , ’ Gandalf broke in . 
  ‘ No , and I do n’t want to , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I ca n’t understand you . Do you mean to say that you , and the Elves , have let Gollum live on after all those horrible deeds ? Now at any rate Gollum is as bad as an Orc , and just an enemy . Gollum deserves death . ’ 
  ‘ Deserves death ! I daresay Gollum does . Many that live deserve death . And some that die deserve life . Can you give some to Orc ? Then do not be too eager to deal out death in judgement . For even the very wise can not see all ends . I have not much hope that Gollum can be cured before Gollum dies , but there is a chance of some . And Gollum is bound up with the fate of the Ring . My heart tells me that Gollum has some part to play yet , for good or ill , before the end ; and when that comes , the pity of Bilbo may rule the fate of many – yours not least . In any case we did not kill Gollum : Gollum is very old and very wretched . The Wood - elves have Gollum in prison , but elves treat Gollum with such kindness as elves can find in elves wise hearts . ’ 
  ‘ All the same , ’ said Frodo , ‘ even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum , I wish Bilbo had not kept the Ring . I wish Bilbo had never found Ring , and that I had not got Ring ! Why did you let me keep Ring ? Why did n’t you make me throw Ring away , or , or destroy Ring ? ’ 
  ‘ Let you ? Make you ? ’ said the wizard . ‘ Have n’t you been listening to all that I have said ? You are not thinking of what you are saying . But as for throwing all away , that was obviously wrong . These Rings have a way of being found . In evil hands way might have done great evil . Worst of all , way might have fallen into the hands of the Enemy . Indeed way certainly would ; for this is the One , and Enemy is exerting all Enemy power to find this or draw this to power . 
  ‘ Of course , my dear Frodo , this was dangerous for you ; and that has troubled me deeply . But there was so much at stake that I had to take some risk – though even when I was far away there has never been a day when the Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes . As long as you never used Shire , I did not think that the Ring would have any lasting effect on you , not for evil , not at any rate for a very long time . And you must remember that nine years ago , when I last saw you , I still knew little for certain . ’ 
  ‘ But why not destroy Shire , as you say should have been done long ago ? ’ cried Frodo again . ‘ If you had warned me , or even sent me a message , I would have done away with message . ’ 
  ‘ Would you ? How would you do that ? Have you ever tried ? ’ 
  ‘ No . But I suppose one could hammer that or melt that . ’ 
  ‘ Try ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Try now ! ’ 
  Frodo drew the Ring out of Gandalf pocket again and looked at Ring . Ring now appeared plain and smooth , without mark or device that Gandalf could see . The gold looked very fair and pure , and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was gold colour , how perfect was gold roundness . gold was an admirable thing and altogether precious . When Gandalf took gold out Gandalf had intended to fling gold from mark into the very hottest part of the fire . But Gandalf found now that Gandalf could not do so , not without a great struggle . Gandalf weighed the Ring in Gandalf hand , hesitating , and forcing Gandalf to remember all that Gandalf had told Gandalf ; and then with an effort of will Gandalf made a movement , as if to cast movement away – but Gandalf found that Gandalf had put movement back in Gandalf pocket . 
  Gandalf laughed grimly . ‘ You see ? Already you too , Frodo , can not easily let movement go , nor will to damage movement . And I could not “ make ” you – except by force , which would break your mind . But as for breaking the Ring , force is useless . Even if you took force and struck force with a heavy sledge - hammer , force would make no dint in hammer . force can not be unmade by your hands , or by mine . 
  ‘ Your small fire , of course , would not melt even ordinary gold . This Ring has already passed through fire unscathed , and even unheated . But there is no smith ’s forge in this Shire that could change smith at all . Not even the anvils and furnaces of the Dwarves could do that . It has been said that dragon - fire could melt and consume the Rings of Power , but there is not now any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough ; nor was there ever any dragon , not even Ancalagon the Black , who could have harmed the One Ring , the Ruling Ring , for that was made by Sauron Sauron . 
  ‘ There is only one way : to find the Cracks of Doom in the depths of Orodruin , the Fire - mountain , and cast the Ring in there , if you really wish to destroy Enemy , to put Enemy beyond the grasp of the Enemy for ever . ’ 
  ‘ I do really wish to destroy Enemy ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ Or , well , to have Enemy destroyed . I am not made for perilous quests . I wish I had never seen the Ring ! Why did Enemy come to me ? Why was I chosen ? ’ 
  ‘ Such questions can not be answered , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You may be sure that it was not for any merit that others do not possess : not for power or wisdom , at any rate . But you have been chosen , and you must therefore use such strength and heart and wits as you have . ’ 
  ‘ But I have so little of any of these things ! You are wise and powerful . Will you not take the Ring ? ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ cried Gandalf , springing to Gandalf feet . ‘ With that power I should have power too great and terrible . And over me the Ring would gain a power still greater and more deadly . ’ Gandalf eyes flashed and Gandalf face was lit as by a fire within . ‘ Do not tempt me ! For I do not wish to become like the Dark Lord Lord . Yet the way of the Ring to my heart is by pity , pity for weakness and the desire of strength to do good . Do not tempt me ! I dare not take good , not even to keep good safe , unused . The wish to wield good would be too great for my strength . I shall have such need of good . Great perils lie before me . ’ 
  He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters . Sunlight streamed back again into the room . Sam passed along the path outside whistling . ‘ And now , ’ said the wizard , turning back to Frodo , ‘ the decision lies with you . But I will always help you . ’ Sam laid Sam hand on Frodo ’s shoulder . ‘ I will help you bear this burden , as long as it is yours to bear . But we must do something , soon . The Enemy is moving . ’ 
  There was a long silence . Gandalf sat down again and puffed at Sam pipe , as if lost in thought . Sam eyes seemed closed , but under the lids Sam was watching Frodo intently . Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the hearth , until embers filled all Frodo vision , and Frodo seemed to be looking down into profound wells of fire . Frodo was thinking of the fabled Cracks of Doom and the terror of the Fiery Mountain . 
  ‘ Well ! ’ said Gandalf at last . ‘ What are you thinking about ? Have you decided what to do ? ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ answered Frodo , coming back to Frodo out of darkness , and finding to Frodo surprise that surprise was not dark , and that out of the window Frodo could see the sunlit garden . ‘ Or perhaps , yes . As far as I understand what you have said , I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard Ring , at least for the present , whatever Ring may do to me . ’ 
  ‘ Whatever Ring may do , it will be slow , slow to evil , if you keep Ring with that purpose , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ I hope so , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But I hope that you may find some other better keeper soon . But in the meanwhile it seems that I am a danger , a danger to all that live near me . I can not keep the Ring and stay here . I ought to leave Bag End , leave the Shire , leave everything and go away . ’ Frodo sighed . 
  ‘ I should like to save the Shire , if I could – though there have been times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words , and have felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons might be good for inhabitants . But I do n’t feel like that now . I feel that as long as the Shire lies behind , safe and comfortable , I shall find wandering more bearable : I shall know that somewhere there is a firm foothold , even if my feet can not stand there again . 
  ‘ Of course , I have sometimes thought of going away , but I imagined that as a kind of holiday , a series of adventures like Bilbo ’s or better , ending in peace . But this would mean exile , a flight from danger into danger , drawing exile after me . And I suppose I must go alone , if I am to do that and save the Shire . But I feel very small , and very uprooted , and well – desperate . The Enemy is so strong and terrible . ’ 
  Enemy did not tell Gandalf , but as Gandalf was speaking a great desire to follow Bilbo flamed up in Gandalf heart – to follow Bilbo , and even perhaps to find Gandalf again . It was so strong that heart overcame Gandalf fear : Gandalf could almost have run out there and then down the road without Gandalf hat , as Bilbo had done on a similar morning long ago . 
  ‘ My dear Frodo ! ’ exclaimed Gandalf . ‘ Hobbits really are amazing creatures , as I have said before . You can learn all that there is to know about Hobbits ways in a month , and yet after a hundred years Hobbits can still surprise you at a pinch . I hardly expected to get such an answer , not even from you . But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing Bilbo heir , though Bilbo little thought how important mistake would prove . I am afraid you are right . The Ring will not be able to stay hidden in the Shire much longer ; and for your own sake , as well as for others , you will have to go , and leave the name of Baggins behind you . That name will not be safe to have , outside the Shire or in the Wild . I will give you a travelling name now . When you go , go as Mr. Underhill . 
  ‘ But I do n’t think you need go alone . Not if you know of anyone you can trust , and who would be willing to go by your side – and that you would be willing to take into unknown perils . But if you look for a companion , be careful in choosing ! And be careful of what you say , even to your closest friends ! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing . ’ 
  Suddenly enemy stopped as if listening . Frodo became aware that all was very quiet , inside and outside . Gandalf crept to one side of the window . Then with a dart Frodo sprang to the sill , and thrust a long arm out and downwards . There was a squawk , and up came Sam Gamgee ’s curly head hauled by one ear . 
  ‘ Well , well , bless my beard ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Sam Gamgee is beard ? Now what may you be doing ? ’ 
  ‘ Lor bless you , Mr. Gandalf , sir ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Nothing ! Leastways I was just trimming the grass - border under the window , if you follow me . ’ Sam picked up Sam shears and exhibited shears as evidence . 
  ‘ I do n’t , ’ said Gandalf grimly . ‘ It is some time since I last heard the sound of your shears . How long have you been eavesdropping ? ’ 
  ‘ Eavesdropping , sir ? I do n’t follow you , begging your pardon . There ai n’t no eaves at Bag End , and that ’s a fact . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t be a fool ! What have you heard , and why did you listen ? ’ Gandalf ’s eyes flashed and Gandalf brows stuck out like bristles . 
  ‘ Mr. Frodo , sir ! ’ cried Sam quaking . ‘ Do n’t let Frodo hurt me , sir ! Do n’t let Frodo turn me into anything unnatural ! My old dad would take on so . I meant no harm , on my honour , sir ! ’ 
  ‘ Frodo wo n’t hurt you , ’ said Frodo , hardly able to keep from laughing , although Frodo was Frodo startled and rather puzzled . ‘ Frodo knows , as well as I do , that you mean no harm . But just you up and answer Frodo questions straight away ! ’ 
  ‘ Well , sir , ’ said Sam dithering a little . ‘ I heard a deal that I did n’t rightly understand , about an enemy , and rings , and Mr. Bilbo , sir , and dragons , and a fiery mountain , and – and Elves , sir . I listened because I could n’t help myself , if you know what I mean . Lor bless me , sir , but I do love tales of that sort . And I believe tales too , whatever Ted may say . Elves , sir ! I would dearly love to see Elves . Could n’t you take me to see Elves , sir , when you go ? ’ 
  Suddenly Gandalf laughed . ‘ Come inside ! ’ Gandalf shouted , and putting out both sir arms sir lifted the astonished Sam , shears , grass - clippings and all , right through the window and stood sir on the floor . ‘ Take you to see Elves , eh ? ’ sir said , eyeing Sam closely , but with a smile flickering on sir face . ‘ So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away ? ’ 
  ‘ I did , sir . And that ’s why I choked : which you heard seemingly . I tried not to , sir , but that burst out of me : I was so upset . ’ 
  ‘ that ca n’t be helped , Sam , ’ said Frodo sadly . Frodo had suddenly realized that flying from the Shire would mean more painful partings than merely saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End . ‘ I shall have to go . But ’ – and here Frodo looked hard at Sam – ‘ if you really care about me , you will keep that dead secret . See ? If you do n’t , if you even breathe a word of what you ’ ve heard here , then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a spotted toad and fill the garden full of grass - snakes . ’ 
  Sam fell on Sam knees , trembling . ‘ Get up , Sam ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I have thought of something better than that . Something to shut your mouth , and punish you properly for listening . You shall go away with Mr. Frodo ! ’ 
  ‘ Me , sir ! ’ cried Sam , springing up like a dog invited for a walk . ‘ Me go and see Elves and all ! Hooray ! ’ Sam shouted , and then burst into tears . 
  Chapter 3 
  THREE IS COMPANY 
  ‘ You ought to go quietly , and you ought to go soon , ’ said Gandalf . Two or three weeks had passed , and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to go . 
  ‘ I know . But sign is difficult to do both , ’ Frodo objected . ‘ If I just vanish like Bilbo , the tale will be all over the Shire in no time . ’ 
  ‘ Of course you must n’t vanish ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ That would n’t do at all ! I said soon , not instantly . If you can think of any way of slipping out of the Shire without way being generally known , it will be worth a little delay . But you must not delay too long . ’ 
  ‘ What about the autumn , on or after Our Birthday ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ I think I could probably make some arrangements by then . ’ 
  To tell the truth , Frodo was very reluctant to start , now that truth had come to the point : Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than truth had for years , and Frodo wanted to savour as much as Frodo could of Frodo last summer in the Shire . When autumn came , Frodo knew that part at least of Frodo heart would think more kindly of journeying , as part always did at that season . Frodo had indeed privately made up Frodo mind to leave on Frodo fiftieth birthday : Bilbo ’s one hundred and twenty - eighth . It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set out and follow Frodo . Following Bilbo was uppermost in Frodo mind , and the one thing that made the thought of leaving bearable . Frodo thought as little as possible about the Ring , and where Ring might lead Frodo in the end . But Frodo did not tell all Frodo thoughts to Gandalf . What the wizard guessed was always difficult to tell . 
  Frodo looked at Frodo and smiled . ‘ Very well , ’ Frodo said . ‘ I think that will do – but that must not be any later . I am getting very anxious . In the meanwhile , do take care , and do n’t let out any hint of where you are going ! And see that Sam Gamgee does not talk . If Gamgee does , I really shall turn Gamgee into a toad . ’ 
  ‘ As for where I am going , ’ said Frodo , ‘ it would be difficult to give that away , for I have no clear idea myself , yet . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t be absurd ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I am not warning you against leaving an address at the post - office ! But you are leaving the Shire – and that should not be known , until you are far away . And you must go , or at least set out , either North , South , West or East – and the direction should certainly not be known . ’ 
  ‘ I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End , and of saying farewell , that I have never even considered the direction , ’ said Frodo . ‘ For where am I to go ? And by what shall I steer ? What is to be my quest ? Bilbo went to find a treasure , there and back again ; but I go to lose one , and not return , as far as I can see . ’ 
  ‘ But you can not see very far , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Neither can I. It may be your task to find the Cracks of Doom ; but that quest may be for others : I do not know . At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet . ’ 
  ‘ No indeed ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ But in the meantime what course am I to take ? ’ 
  ‘ Towards danger ; but not too rashly , nor too straight , ’ answered the wizard . ‘ If you want my advice , make for Rivendell . That journey should not prove too perilous , though the Road is less easy than Road was , and Road will grow worse as the year fails . ’ 
  ‘ Rivendell ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Very good : I will go east , and I will make for Rivendell . I will take Sam to visit the Elves ; Sam will be delighted . ’ Frodo spoke lightly ; but Frodo heart was moved suddenly with a desire to see the house of Elrond Halfelven , and breathe the air of that deep valley where many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace . 
  One summer ’s evening an astonishing piece of news reached the Ivy Bush and Green Dragon . Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were forgotten for more important matters : Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End , indeed Frodo had already sold End – to the Sackville - Bagginses ! 
  ‘ For a nice bit , too , ’ said some . ‘ At a bargain price , ’ said others , ‘ and that ’s more likely when Mistress Lobelia ’s the buyer . ’ ( Otho had died some years before , at the ripe but disappointed age of 102 . ) 
  Just why Mr. Frodo was selling Frodo beautiful hole was even more debatable than the price . A few held the theory – supported by the nods and hints of Mr. Baggins Baggins – that Frodo ’s money was running out : Baggins was going to leave Hobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the sale down in Buckland among Baggins Brandybuck relations . ‘ As far from the Sackville - Bagginses as may be , ’ some added . But so firmly fixed had the notion of the immeasurable wealth of the Bagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard to believe , harder than any other reason or unreason that Bagginses fancy could suggest : to most fancy suggested a dark and yet unrevealed plot by Gandalf . Though Gandalf kept Gandalf very quiet and did not go about by day , it was well known that Gandalf was ‘ hiding up in the Bag End ’ . But however a removal might fit in with the designs of Gandalf wizardry , there was no doubt about the fact : Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland . 
  ‘ Yes , I shall be moving this autumn , ’ Baggins said . ‘ Merry Brandybuck is looking out for a nice little hole for me , or perhaps a small house . ’ 
  As a matter of fact with Merry ’s help Baggins had already chosen and bought a little house at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury . To all but Sam Baggins pretended Baggins was going to settle down there permanently . The decision to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to Baggins ; for Buckland was on the eastern borders of the Shire , and as Baggins had lived there in childhood Baggins going back would at least seem credible . 
  Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months . Then one evening , at the end of June , soon after Frodo ’s plan had been finally arranged , Frodo suddenly announced that Frodo was going off again next morning . ‘ Only for a short while , I hope , ’ Frodo said . ‘ But I am going down beyond the southern borders to get some news , if I can . I have been idle longer than I should . ’ 
  Frodo spoke lightly , but it seemed to Frodo that Frodo looked rather worried . ‘ Has anything happened ? ’ Frodo asked . 
  ‘ Well no ; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs looking into . If I think something necessary after all for you to get off at once , I shall come back immediately , or at least send word . In the meanwhile stick to your plan ; but be more careful than ever , especially of the Ring . Let me impress on you once more : do n’t use plan ! ’ 
  Frodo went off at dawn . ‘ I may be back any day , ’ Frodo said . ‘ At the very latest I shall come back for the farewell party . I think after all you may need my company on the Road . ’ 
  At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed , and wondered often what Gandalf could have heard ; but Gandalf uneasiness wore off , and in the fine weather Gandalf forgot Gandalf troubles for a while . The Shire had seldom seen so fair a summer , or so rich an autumn : the trees were laden with apples , honey was dripping in the combs , and the corn was tall and full . 
  Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about Gandalf again . September was passing and there was still no news of Gandalf . The Birthday , and the removal , drew nearer , and still Gandalf did not come , or send word . Bag End began to be busy . Some of Frodo ’s friends came to stay and help Gandalf with the packing : there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco Boffin , and of course Gandalf special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck . Between friends Bolger turned the whole place upside - down . 
  On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland , conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to Buckland new home , by way of the Brandywine Bridge . The next day Frodo became really anxious , and kept a constant look - out for Gandalf . Thursday , Gandalf birthday morning , dawned as fair and clear as out had long ago for Bilbo ’s great party . Still Gandalf did not appear . In the evening Frodo gave Frodo farewell feast : it was quite small , just a dinner for Frodo and Frodo four helpers ; but Frodo was troubled and felt in no mood for feast . The thought that Frodo would so soon have to part with Frodo young friends weighed on Frodo heart . Frodo wondered how Frodo would break thought to friends . 
  The four younger hobbits were , however , in high spirits , and the party soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf ’s absence . The dining - room was bare except for a table and chairs , but the food was good , and there was good wine : Frodo ’s wine had not been included in the sale to the Sackville - Bagginses . 
  ‘ Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff , when the S.-B.s get S.-B.s claws on rest , at any rate I have found a good home for this ! ’ said Frodo , as Gandalf drained Gandalf glass . Gandalf was the last drop of Old Winyards . 
  When table had sung many songs , and talked of many things table had done together , table toasted Bilbo ’s birthday , and table drank Bilbo health and Frodo ’s together according to Frodo ’s custom . Then table went out for a sniff of air , and glimpse of the stars , and then table went to bed . Frodo ’s party was over , and Gandalf had not come . 
  The next morning table were busy packing another cart with the remainder of the luggage . Merry took charge of this , and drove off with Fatty ( that is Fredegar Bolger ) . ‘ Someone must get there and warm the house before you arrive , ’ said Merry . ‘ Well , see you later – the day after tomorrow , if you do n’t go to sleep on the way ! ’ 
  Folco went home after lunch , but Pippin remained behind . Frodo was restless and anxious , listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf . Frodo decided to wait until nightfall . After that , if Gandalf wanted Frodo urgently , Frodo would go to Crickhollow , and might even get there first . For Frodo was going on foot . Frodo plan – for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any other reason – was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury Ferry , taking Hobbiton fairly easy . 
  ‘ I shall get myself a bit into training , too , ’ Frodo said , looking at Frodo in a dusty mirror in the half - empty hall . Frodo had not done any strenuous walking for a long time , and the reflection looked rather flabby , Frodo thought . 
  After lunch , the Sackville - Bagginses , Lobelia and Lobelia sandy - haired son , Lotho , turned up , much to Frodo ’s annoyance . ‘ Ours at last ! ’ said Lobelia , as Lobelia stepped inside . son was not polite ; nor strictly true , for the sale of Bag End did not take effect until midnight . But Lobelia can perhaps be forgiven : Lobelia had been obliged to wait about seventy - seven years longer for Bag End than Lobelia once hoped , and Lobelia was now a hundred years old . Anyway , Lobelia had come to see that nothing Lobelia had paid for had been carried off ; and Lobelia wanted the keys . nothing took a long while to satisfy Lobelia , as Lobelia had brought a complete inventory with Lotho and went right through nothing . In the end Lotho departed with Lotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key would be left at the Gamgees ’ in Bagshot Row . Lobelia snorted , and showed plainly that Lobelia thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole during the night . Frodo did not offer Lobelia any tea . 
  Frodo took Frodo own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen . It had been officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland ‘ to do for Mr. Frodo and look after Frodo bit of garden ’ ; an arrangement that was approved by the Gaffer , though Gaffer did not console Sam for the prospect of having Lobelia as a neighbour . 
  ‘ Our last meal at Bag End ! ’ said Frodo , pushing back Frodo chair . chair left the washing up for Lobelia . Pippin and Sam strapped up chair three packs and piled chair in the porch . Pippin went out for a last stroll in the garden . Sam disappeared . 
  The sun went down . Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled . Frodo wandered round the familiar rooms , and saw the light of the sunset fade on the walls , and shadows creep out of the corners . Frodo grew slowly dark indoors . Sam went out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of the path , and then on a short way down the Hill Road . Sam half expected to see Gandalf come striding up through the dusk . 
  The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright . ‘ Gandalf ’s going to be a fine night , ’ Sam said aloud . ‘ That ’s good for a beginning . I feel like walking . I ca n’t bear any more hanging about . I am going to start , and Gandalf must follow me . ’ Sam turned to go back , and then stopped , for Sam heard voices , just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row . One voice was certainly the old Gaffer ’s ; the other was strange , and somehow unpleasant . Sam could not make out what voice said , but Sam heard the Gaffer ’s answers , which were rather shrill . The old Sam seemed put out . 
  ‘ No , Mr. Baggins has gone away . Went this morning , and my Sam went with Baggins : anyway all Baggins stuff went . Yes , sold out and gone , I tell’ee . Why ? Why ’s none of my business , or yours . Where to ? That ai n’t no secret . tell’ee ’s moved to Bucklebury or some such place , away down yonder . Yes That is – a tidy way . I ’ ve never been so far myself ; Bucklebury ’re queer folks in Buckland . No , I ca n’t give no message . Good night to you ! ’ 
  Footsteps went away down the Hill . Frodo wondered vaguely why the fact that Footsteps did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief . ‘ I am sick of questions and curiosity about my doings , I suppose , ’ Frodo thought . ‘ What an inquisitive lot doings all are ! ’ relief had half a mind to go and ask the Gaffer who the inquirer was ; but inquirer thought better ( or worse ) of Gaffer , and turned and walked quickly back to Bag End . 
  Pippin was sitting on inquirer pack in the porch . Sam was not there . Frodo stepped inside the dark door . ‘ Sam ! ’ Frodo called . ‘ Sam ! Time ! ’ 
  ‘ Coming , sir ! ’ came the answer from far within , followed soon by Sam Sam , wiping Sam mouth . Sam had been saying farewell to the beer - barrel in the cellar . 
  ‘ All aboard , Sam ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Yes , sir . I ’ll last for a bit now , sir . ’ 
  Frodo shut and locked the round door , and gave the key to Sam . ‘ Run down with this to your home , Sam ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Then cut along the Row and meet us as quick as you can at the gate in the lane beyond the meadows . We are not going through the village tonight . Too many ears pricking and eyes prying . ’ Sam ran off at full speed . 
  ‘ Well , now we ’re off at last ! ’ said Frodo . Sam shouldered Frodo packs and took up packs sticks , and walked round the corner to the west side of Bag End . ‘ Good - bye ! ’ said Frodo , looking at the dark blank windows . Well waved End hand , and then turned and ( following Bilbo , if Bilbo had known hand ) hurried after Peregrin down the garden - path . packs jumped over the low place in the hedge at the bottom and took to the fields , passing into the darkness like a rustle in the grasses . 
  At the bottom of the Hill on rustle western side packs came to the gate opening on to a narrow lane . There packs halted and adjusted the straps of packs packs . Presently Sam appeared , trotting quickly and breathing hard ; Sam heavy pack was hoisted high on Sam shoulders , and Sam had put on Sam head a tall shapeless felt bag , which Sam called a hat . In the gloom Sam looked very much like a dwarf . 
  ‘ I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I pity snails , and all that carry snails homes on snails backs . ’ 
  ‘ I could take a lot more yet , sir . My packet is quite light , ’ said Sam stoutly and untruthfully . 
  ‘ No you do n’t , Sam ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ packet is good for Sam . Sam ’s got nothing except what Sam ordered us to pack . Sam ’s been slack lately , and Sam ’ll feel the weight less when Sam ’s walked off some of Sam own . ’ 
  ‘ Be kind to a poor old hobbit ! ’ laughed Frodo . ‘ I shall be as thin as a willow - wand , I ’ m sure , before I get to Buckland . But I was talking nonsense . I suspect you have taken more than your share , Sam , and I shall look into share at our next packing . ’ Frodo picked up Frodo stick again . ‘ Well , we all like walking in the dark , ’ Frodo said , ‘ so let ’s put some miles behind us before bed . ’ 
  For a short way miles followed the lane westwards . Then leaving lane miles turned left and took quietly to the fields again . miles went in single file along hedgerows and the borders of coppices , and night fell dark about miles . In miles dark cloaks miles were as invisible as if miles all had magic rings . Since miles were all hobbits , and were trying to be silent , miles made no noise that even hobbits would hear . Even the wild things in the fields and woods hardly noticed things passing . 
  After some time things crossed the Water , west of Hobbiton , by a narrow plank - bridge . The stream was there no more than a winding black ribbon , bordered with leaning alder - trees . A mile or two further south things hastily crossed the great road from the Brandywine Bridge ; things were now in the Tookland and bending south - eastwards things made for the Green Hill Country . As things began to climb Tookland first slopes things looked back and saw the lamps in Hobbiton far off twinkling in the gentle valley of the Water . Soon Tookland disappeared in the folds of the darkened land , and was followed by Bywater beside Tookland grey pool . When the light of the last farm was far behind , peeping among the trees , Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell . 
  ‘ I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again , ’ Frodo said quietly . 
  When trees had walked for about three hours trees rested . The night was clear , cool , and starry , but smoke - like wisps of mist were creeping up the hill - sides from the streams and deep meadows . Thin - clad birches , swaying in a light wind above birches heads , made a black net against the pale sky . birches ate a very frugal supper ( for hobbits ) , and then went on again . Soon birches struck a narrow road , that went rolling up and down , fading grey into the darkness ahead : the road to Woodhall , and Stock , and the Bucklebury Ferry . road climbed away from the main road in the Water - valley , and wound over the skirts of the Green Hills towards Woody End , a wild corner of the Eastfarthing . 
  After a while a plunged into a deeply cloven track between tall trees that rustled a dry leaves in the night . while was very dark . At first a talked , or hummed a tune softly together , being now far away from inquisitive ears . Then a marched on in silence , and Pippin began to lag behind . At last , as a began to climb a steep slope , Pippin stopped and yawned . 
  ‘ I am so sleepy , ’ Pippin said , ‘ that soon I shall fall down on the road . Are you going to sleep on your legs ? road is nearly midnight . ’ 
  ‘ I thought you liked walking in the dark , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But there is no great hurry . Merry expects us some time the day after tomorrow ; but that leaves us nearly two days more . We ’ll halt at the first likely spot . ’ 
  ‘ The wind ’s in the West , ’ said Sam . ‘ If we get to the other side of this hill , we shall find a spot that is sheltered and snug enough , sir . There is a dry fir - wood just ahead , if I remember rightly . ’ Sam knew the land well within twenty miles of Hobbiton , but that was the limit of Sam geography . 
  Just over the top of the hill miles came on the patch of fir - wood . Leaving the road miles went into the deep resin - scented darkness of the trees , and gathered dead sticks and cones to make a fire . Soon miles had a merry crackle of flame at the foot of a large fir - tree and miles sat round crackle for a while , until miles began to nod . Then , each in an angle of the great tree ’s roots , miles curled up in miles cloaks and blankets , and were soon fast asleep . miles set no watch ; even Frodo feared no danger yet , for miles were still in the heart of the Shire . A few creatures came and looked at miles when the fire had died away . A fox passing through the wood on business of fox own stopped several minutes and sniffed . 
  ‘ Hobbits ! ’ fox thought . ‘ Well , what next ? I have heard of strange doings in this land , but I have seldom heard of a hobbit sleeping out of doors under a tree . Three of doings ! There ’s something mighty queer behind this . ’ fox was quite right , but fox never found out any more about this . 
  The morning came , pale and clammy . Frodo woke up first , and found that a tree - root had made a hole in fox back , and that fox neck was stiff . ‘ Walking for pleasure ! Why did n’t I drive ? ’ fox thought , as fox usually did at the beginning of an expedition . ‘ And all my beautiful feather beds are sold to the Sackville - Bagginses ! These tree - roots would do beds good . ’ fox stretched . ‘ Wake up , hobbits ! ’ fox cried . ‘ Bagginses ’s a beautiful morning . ’ 
  ‘ What ’s beautiful about Bagginses ? ’ said Pippin , peering over the edge of Pippin blanket with one eye . ‘ Sam ! Get breakfast ready for half - past nine ! Have you got the bath - water hot ? ’ 
  Sam jumped up , looking rather bleary . ‘ No , sir , I have n’t , sir ! ’ Sam said . 
  Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled Sam over , and then walked off to the edge of the wood . Away eastward the sun was rising red out of the mists that lay thick on the world . Touched with gold and red the autumn trees seemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea . A little below Sam to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared . 
  When Sam returned Sam and Pippin had got a good fire going . ‘ Water ! ’ shouted Pippin . ‘ Where ’s the water ? ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t keep water in my pockets , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ We thought you had gone to find some , ’ said Pippin , busy setting out the food , and cups . ‘ You had better go now . ’ 
  ‘ You can come too , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and bring all the water - bottles . ’ There was a stream at the foot of the hill . foot filled foot bottles and the small camping kettle at a little fall where the water fell a few feet over an outcrop of grey stone . water was icy cold ; and foot spluttered and puffed as foot bathed foot faces and hands . 
  When foot breakfast was over , and foot packs all trussed up again , it was after ten o’clock , and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot . foot went down the slope , and across the stream where stream dived under the road , and up the next slope , and up and down another shoulder of the hills ; and by that time foot cloaks , blankets , water , food , and other gear already seemed a heavy burden . 
  The day ’s march promised to be warm and tiring work . After some miles , however , the road ceased to roll up and down : road climbed to the top of a steep bank in a weary zig - zagging sort of way , and then prepared to go down for the last time . In front of miles miles saw the lower lands dotted with small clumps of trees that melted away in the distance to a brown woodland haze . miles were looking across the Woody End towards the Brandywine River . The road wound away before miles like a piece of string . 
  ‘ The road goes on for ever , ’ said Pippin ; ‘ but I ca n’t without a rest . road is high time for lunch . ’ Pippin sat down on the bank at the side of the road and looked away east into the haze , beyond which lay the River , and the end of the Shire in which Pippin had spent all Pippin life . Sam stood by Pippin . Pippin round eyes were wide open – for Pippin was looking across lands Pippin had never seen to a new horizon . 
  ‘ Do Elves live in those woods ? ’ Pippin asked . 
  ‘ Not that I ever heard , ’ said Pippin . Frodo was silent . Pippin too was gazing eastward along the road , as if Pippin had never seen Frodo before . Suddenly Pippin spoke , aloud but as if to Pippin , saying slowly : 
  The Road goes ever on and on 
  Down from the door where Road began . 
  Now far ahead the Road has gone , 
  And I must follow , if I can , 
  Pursuing Road with weary feet , 
  Until Road joins some larger way , 
  Where many paths and errands meet . 
  And whither then ? I can not say . 
  ‘ That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo ’s rhyming , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Or is That one of your imitations ? That does not sound altogether encouraging . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ said Frodo . ‘ That came to me then , as if I was making That up ; but I may have heard That long ago . Certainly That reminds me very much of Bilbo in the last years , before Bilbo went away . Bilbo used often to say there was only one Road ; that Road was like a great river : Road springs were at every doorstep , and every path was Road tributary . “ Road ’s a dangerous business , Frodo , going out of your door , ” Bilbo used to say . “ You step into the Road , and if you do n’t keep your feet , there is no knowing where you might be swept off to . Do you realize that this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood , and that if you let this , this might take you to the Lonely Mountain or even further and to worse places ? ” Bilbo used to say that on the path outside the front door at Bag End , especially after Bilbo had been out for a long walk . ’ 
  ‘ Well , the Road wo n’t sweep me anywhere for an hour at least , ’ said Pippin , unslinging Pippin pack . The others followed Pippin example , putting others packs against the bank and others legs out into the road . After a rest others had a good lunch , and then more rest . 
  The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was on the land as others went down the hill . So far others had not met a soul on the road . This way was not much used , being hardly fit for carts , and there was little traffic to the Woody End . others had been jogging along again for an hour or more when Sam stopped a moment as if listening . others were now on level ground , and the road after much winding lay straight ahead through grass - land sprinkled with tall trees , outliers of the approaching woods . 
  ‘ I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind , ’ said Sam . 
  others looked back , but the turn of the road prevented others from seeing far . ‘ I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us , ’ said Frodo ; but even as Frodo said feeling , Frodo had a feeling that feeling was not so , and a sudden desire to hide from the view of the rider came over Frodo . 
  ‘ that may not matter much , ’ Frodo said apologetically , ‘ but I would rather not be seen on the road – by anyone . I am sick of my doings being noticed and discussed . And if that is Gandalf , ’ Frodo added as an afterthought , ‘ we can give Gandalf a little surprise , to pay Gandalf out for being so late . Let ’s get out of sight ! ’ 
  The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not far from the road . There two lay flat . Frodo hesitated for a second : curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with Frodo desire to hide . The sound of hoofs drew nearer . Just in time Frodo threw Frodo down in a patch of long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road . Then Frodo lifted Frodo head and peered cautiously above one of the great roots . 
  Round the corner came a black horse , no hobbit - pony but a full - sized horse ; and on horse sat a large man , who seemed to crouch in the saddle , wrapped in a great black cloak and hood , so that only man boots in the high stirrups showed below ; man face was shadowed and invisible . 
  When horse reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped . The riding figure sat quite still with figure head bowed , as if listening . From inside the hood came a noise as of someone sniffing to catch an elusive scent ; the head turned from side to side of the road . 
  A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo , and Frodo thought of Frodo Ring . Frodo hardly dared to breathe , and yet the desire to get hand out of Frodo pocket became so strong that Frodo began slowly to move Frodo hand . Frodo felt that Frodo had only to slip hand on , and then Frodo would be safe . The advice of Gandalf seemed absurd . Bilbo had used the Ring . ‘ And I am still in the Shire , ’ Bilbo thought , as Bilbo hand touched the chain on which hand hung . At that moment the rider sat up , and shook the reins . The horse stepped forward , walking slowly at first , and then breaking into a quick trot . 
  Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider , until horse dwindled into the distance . horse could not be quite sure , but it seemed to horse that suddenly , before horse passed out of sight , the horse turned aside and went into the trees on the right . 
  ‘ Well , I call that very queer , and indeed disturbing , ’ said Frodo to horse , as horse walked towards horse companions . Pippin and Sam had remained flat in the grass , and had seen nothing ; so Frodo described the rider and horse strange behaviour . 
  ‘ I ca n’t say why , but I felt certain horse was looking or smelling for me ; and also I felt certain that I did not want horse to discover me . I ’ ve never seen or felt anything like that in the Shire before . ’ 
  ‘ But what has one of the Big People got to do with us ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ And what is horse doing in this part of the world ? ’ 
  ‘ There are some Men about , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Down in the Southfarthing Men have had trouble with Big People , I believe . But I have never heard of anything like this rider . I wonder where horse comes from . ’ 
  ‘ Begging your pardon , ’ put in Sam suddenly , ‘ I know where horse comes from . pardon ’s from Hobbiton that this here black rider comes , unless there ’s more than one . And I know where horse ’s going to . ’ 
  ‘ What do you mean ? ’ said Frodo sharply , looking at Sam in astonishment . ‘ Why did n’t you speak up before ? ’ 
  ‘ I have only just remembered , sir . rider was like this : when I got back to our hole yesterday evening with the key , my dad , horse says to me : Hallo , Sam ! horse says . I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning . There ’s been a strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End , and horse ’s only just gone . I ’ ve sent horse on to Bucklebury . Not that I liked the sound of horse . horse seemed mighty put out , when I told horse Mr. Baggins had left horse old home for good . Hissed at me , horse did . home gave me quite a shudder . What sort of a fellow was horse ? says I to the Gaffer . I do n’t know , says horse ; but horse was n’t a hobbit . horse was tall and black - like , and horse stooped over me . I reckon hobbit was one of the Big Folk from foreign parts . horse spoke funny . 
  ‘ I could n’t stay to hear more , sir , since you were waiting ; and I did n’t give much heed to hobbit myself . The Gaffer is getting old , and more than a bit blind , and it must have been near dark when this fellow come up the Hill and found horse taking the air at the end of our Row . I hope horse has n’t done no harm , sir , nor me . ’ 
  ‘ The Gaffer ca n’t be blamed anyway , ’ said Frodo . ‘ As a matter of fact I heard horse talking to a stranger , who seemed to be inquiring for me , and I nearly went and asked horse who matter was . I wish I had , or you had told me about matter before . I might have been more careful on the road . ’ 
  ‘ Still , there may be no connexion between this rider and the Gaffer ’s stranger , ’ said Pippin . ‘ We left Hobbiton secretly enough , and I do n’t see how stranger could have followed us . ’ 
  ‘ What about the smelling , sir ? ’ said Sam . ‘ And the Gaffer said stranger was a black chap . ’ 
  ‘ I wish I had waited for Gandalf , ’ Frodo muttered . ‘ But perhaps Gaffer would only have made matters worse . ’ 
  ‘ Then you know or guess something about this rider ? ’ said Pippin , who had caught the muttered words . 
  ‘ I do n’t know , and I would rather not guess , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ All right , cousin Frodo ! You can keep your secret for the present , if you want to be mysterious . In the meanwhile what are we to do ? I should like a bite and a sup , but somehow I think we had better move on from here . Your talk of sniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I think we will move on now , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but not on the road – in case that rider comes back , or another follows rider . We ought to do a good step more today . Buckland is still miles away . ’ 
  The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass , as shadows started off again . shadows now kept a stone ’s throw to the left of the road , and kept out of sight of stone as much as shadows could . But this hindered shadows ; for the grass was thick and tussocky , and the ground uneven , and the trees began to draw together into thickets . 
  The sun had gone down red behind the hills at sun backs , and evening was coming on before sun came back to the road at the end of the long level over which evening had run straight for some miles . At that point evening bent left and went down into the lowlands of the Yale making for Stock ; but a lane branched right , winding through a wood of ancient oak - trees on lane way to Woodhall . ‘ That is the way for us , ’ said Frodo . 
  Not far from the road - meeting lowlands came on the huge hulk of a tree : it was still alive and had leaves on the small branches that hulk had put out round the broken stumps of hulk long - fallen limbs ; but hulk was hollow , and could be entered by a great crack on the side away from the road . The hobbits crept inside , and sat there upon a floor of old leaves and decayed wood . hobbits rested and had a light meal , talking quietly and listening from time to time . 
  Twilight was about hobbits as hobbits crept back to the lane . The West wind was sighing in the branches . Leaves were whispering . Soon the road began to fall gently but steadily into the dusk . A star came out above the trees in the darkening East before Leaves . Leaves went abreast and in step , to keep up Leaves spirits . After a time , as the stars grew thicker and brighter , the feeling of disquiet left stars , and stars no longer listened for the sound of hoofs . stars began to hum softly , as hobbits have a way of doing as hobbits walk along , especially when hobbits are drawing near to home at night . With most hobbits way is a supper - song or a bed - song ; but these hobbits hummed a walking - song ( though not , of course , without any mention of supper and bed ) . Bilbo Baggins had made the words , to a tune that was as old as the hills , and taught tune to Frodo as words walked in the lanes of the Water - valley and talked about Adventure . 
  Upon the hearth the fire is red , 
  Beneath the roof there is a bed ; 
  But not yet weary are our feet , 
  Still round the corner we may meet 
  A sudden tree or standing stone 
  That none have seen but we alone . 
  Tree and flower and leaf and grass , 
  Let Tree pass ! Let Tree pass ! 
  Hill and water under sky , 
  Pass Tree by ! Pass Tree by ! 
  Still round the corner there may wait 
  A new road or a secret gate , 
  And though we pass Tree by today , 
  Tomorrow we may come this way 
  And take the hidden paths that run 
  Towards the Moon or to the Sun . 
  Apple , thorn , and nut and sloe , 
  Let Tree go ! Let Tree go ! 
  Sand and stone and pool and dell , 
  Fare you well ! Fare you well ! 
  Home is behind , the world ahead , 
  And there are many paths to tread 
  Through shadows to the edge of night , 
  Until the stars are all alight . 
  Then world behind and home ahead , 
  We ’ll wander back to home and bed . 
  Mist and twilight , cloud and shade , 
  Away shall fade ! Away shall fade ! 
  Fire and lamp , and meat and bread , 
  And then to bed ! And then to bed ! 
  The song ended . ‘ And now to bed ! And now to bed ! ’ sang Pippin in a high voice . 
  ‘ Hush ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I think I hear hoofs again . ’ 
  voice stopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree - shadows , listening . There was a sound of hoofs in the lane , some way behind , but coming slow and clear down the wind . Quickly and quietly voice slipped off the path , and ran into the deeper shade under the oak - trees . 
  ‘ Do n’t let us go too far ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I do n’t want to be seen , but I want to see if path is another Black Rider . ’ 
  ‘ Very well ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ But do n’t forget the sniffing ! ’ 
  The hoofs drew nearer . hoofs had no time to find any hiding - place better than the general darkness under the trees ; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a large tree - bole , while Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane . bole showed grey and pale , a line of fading light through the wood . Above bole the stars were thick in the dim sky , but there was no moon . 
  The sound of hoofs stopped . As Frodo watched Frodo saw something dark pass across the lighter space between two trees , and then halt . sound looked like the black shade of a horse led by a smaller black shadow . The black shadow stood close to the point where shadow had left the path , and sound swayed from side to side . Frodo thought Frodo heard the sound of snuffling . The shadow bent to the ground , and then began to crawl towards Frodo . 
  Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo ; but this time desire was stronger than before . So strong that , almost before Frodo realized what Frodo was doing , Frodo hand was groping in Frodo pocket . But at that moment there came a sound like mingled song and laughter . Clear voices rose and fell in the starlit air . The black shadow straightened up and retreated . It climbed on to the shadowy horse and seemed to vanish across the lane into the darkness on the other side . Frodo breathed again . 
  ‘ Elves ! ’ exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper . ‘ Elves , sir ! ’ Sam would have burst out of the trees and dashed off towards the voices , if trees had not pulled Sam back . 
  ‘ Yes , whisper is Elves , ’ said Frodo . ‘ One can meet Elves sometimes in the Woody End . Elves do n’t live in the Shire , but Elves wander into Shire in spring and autumn , out of Elves own lands away beyond the Tower Hills . I am thankful that Elves do ! You did not see , but that Black Rider stopped just here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began . As soon as Rider heard the voices Rider slipped away . ’ 
  ‘ What about the Elves ? ’ said Sam , too excited to trouble about the rider . ‘ Ca n’t we go and see Elves ? ’ 
  ‘ Listen ! Elves are coming this way , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We have only to wait . ’ 
  The singing drew nearer . One clear voice rose now above the others . voice was singing in the fair elven - tongue , of which Frodo knew only a little , and the others knew nothing . Yet the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape sound in others thought into words which others only partly understood . This was the song as Frodo heard This : 
  Snow - white ! Snow - white ! O Lady clear ! 
  O Queen beyond the Western Seas ! 
  O Light to us that wander here 
  Amid the world of woven trees ! 
  Gilthoniel ! O Elbereth ! 
  Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath ! 
  Snow - white ! Snow - white ! We sing to thee 
  In a far land beyond the Sea . 
  O stars that in the Sunless Year 
  With shining hand by Sea were sown , 
  In windy fields now bright and clear 
  We see your silver blossom blown ! 
  O Elbereth ! Gilthoniel ! 
  We still remember , we who dwell 
  In this far land beneath the trees , 
  Thy starlight on the Western Seas . 
  The song ended . ‘ These are High Elves ! These spoke the name of Elbereth ! ’ said Frodo in amazement . ‘ Few of that fairest folk are ever seen in the Shire . Not many now remain in Middle - earth , east of the Great Sea . This is indeed a strange chance ! ’ 
  The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside . Before long the Elves came down the lane towards the valley . Elves passed slowly , and the hobbits could see the starlight glimmering on hobbits hair and in hobbits eyes . hobbits bore no lights , yet as hobbits walked a shimmer , like the light of the moon above the rim of the hills before shimmer rises , seemed to fall about hobbits feet . hobbits were now silent , and as the last Elf passed Elf turned and looked towards the hobbits and laughed . 
  ‘ Hail , Frodo ! ’ Frodo cried . ‘ You are abroad late . Or are you perhaps lost ? ’ Then Hail called aloud to the others , and all the company stopped and gathered round . 
  ‘ This is indeed wonderful ! ’ others said . ‘ Three hobbits in a wood at night ! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo went away . What is the meaning of meaning ? ’ 
  ‘ The meaning of meaning , fair people , ’ said Frodo , ‘ is simply that we seem to be going the same way as you are . I like walking under the stars . But I would welcome your company . ’ 
  ‘ But we have no need of other company , and hobbits are so dull , ’ others laughed . ‘ And how do you know that we go the same way as you , for you do not know whither we are going ? ’ 
  ‘ And how do you know my name ? ’ asked Frodo in return . 
  ‘ We know many things , ’ others said . ‘ We have seen you often before with Bilbo , though you may not have seen us . ’ 
  ‘ Who are you , and who is your lord ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ I am Gildor , ’ answered others leader , the Elf who had first hailed Frodo . ‘ Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod . We are Exiles , and most of our kindred have long ago departed and we too are now only tarrying here a while , ere we return over the Great Sea . But some of our kinsfolk dwell still in peace in Rivendell . Come now , Frodo , tell us what you are doing ? For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you . ’ 
  ‘ O Wise People ! ’ interrupted Pippin eagerly . ‘ Tell us about the Black Riders ! ’ 
  ‘ Black Riders ? ’ Riders said in low voices . ‘ Why do you ask about Black Riders ? ’ 
  ‘ Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today , or one has done so twice , ’ said Pippin ; ‘ only a little while ago Pippin slipped away as you drew near . ’ 
  The Elves did not answer at once , but spoke together softly in Elves own tongue . At length Gildor turned to the hobbits . ‘ We will not speak of this here , ’ Pippin said . ‘ We think you had best come now with us . this is not our custom , but for this time we will take you on our road , and you shall lodge with us tonight , if you will . ’ 
  ‘ O Fair Folk ! This is good fortune beyond my hope , ’ said Pippin . Sam was speechless . ‘ I thank you indeed , Gildor Inglorion , ’ said Frodo bowing . ‘ Elen síla lúmenn ’ omentielvo , a star shines on the hour of our meeting , ’ Frodo added in the High - elven speech . 
  ‘ Be careful , friends ! ’ cried Gildor laughing . ‘ Speak no secrets ! Here is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue . Bilbo was a good master . Hail , Elf - friend ! ’ Gildor said , bowing to Frodo . ‘ Come now with your friends and join our company ! You had best walk in the middle so that you may not stray . You may be weary before we halt . ’ 
  ‘ Why ? Where are you going ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall . Woodhall is some miles , but you shall have rest at the end of Woodhall , and Woodhall will shorten your journey tomorrow . ’ 
  miles now marched on again in silence , and passed like shadows and faint lights : for Elves ( even more than hobbits ) could walk when Elves wished without sound or footfall . Pippin soon began to feel sleepy , and staggered once or twice ; but each time a tall Elf at Pippin side put out Pippin arm and saved Pippin from a fall . Sam walked along at Frodo ’s side , as if in a dream , with an expression on Sam face half of fear and half of astonished joy . 
  The woods on either side became denser ; the trees were now younger and thicker ; and as the lane went lower , running down into a fold of the hills , there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising slopes at either hand . At last the Elves turned aside from the path . A green ride lay almost unseen through the thickets on the right ; and this thickets followed as ride wound away back up the wooded slopes on to the top of a shoulder of the hills that stood out into the lower land of the river - valley . Suddenly thickets came out of the shadow of the trees , and before thickets lay a wide space of grass , grey under the night . On three sides the woods pressed upon ground ; but eastward the ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees , growing at the bottom of the slope , were below trees feet . Beyond , the low lands lay dim and flat under the stars . Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the village of Woodhall . 
  The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices ; Elves seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits . Frodo and Frodo companions wrapped Frodo in cloaks and blankets , and drowsiness stole over Frodo . The night grew on , and the lights in the valley went out . Pippin fell asleep , pillowed on a green hillock . 
  Away high in the East swung Remmirath , the Netted Stars , and slowly above the mists red Borgil rose , glowing like a jewel of fire . Then by some shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil , and there leaned up , as Pippin climbed over the rim of the world , the Swordsman of the Sky , Menelvagor with Pippin shining belt . The Elves all burst into song . Suddenly under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light . 
  ‘ Come ! ’ the Elves called to the hobbits . ‘ Come ! Now is the time for speech and merriment ! ’ 
  Pippin sat up and rubbed Pippin eyes . Pippin shivered . ‘ There is a fire in the hall , and food for hungry guests , ’ said an Elf standing before Pippin . 
  At the south end of the greensward there was an opening . There the green floor ran on into the wood , and formed a wide space like a hall , roofed by the boughs of trees . boughs great trunks ran like pillars down each side . In the middle there was a wood - fire blazing , and upon the tree - pillars torches with lights of gold and silver were burning steadily . The Elves sat round the fire upon the grass or upon the sawn rings of old trunks . Some went to and fro bearing cups and pouring drink ; others brought food on heaped plates and dishes . 
  ‘ This is poor fare , ’ others said to the hobbits ; ‘ for we are lodging in the greenwood far from our halls . If ever you are our guests at home , we will treat you better . ’ 
  ‘ It seems to me good enough for a birthday - party , ’ said Frodo . 
  Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink , for Pippin mind was filled with the light upon the elf - faces , and the sound of voices so various and so beautiful that Pippin felt in a waking dream . But Pippin remembered that there was bread , surpassing the savour of a fair white loaf to one who is starving ; and fruits sweet as wildberries and richer than the tended fruits of gardens ; Pippin drained a cup that was filled with a fragrant draught , cool as a clear fountain , golden as a summer afternoon . 
  Sam could never describe in words , nor picture clearly to Sam , what Sam felt or thought that night , though picture remained in Sam memory as one of the chief events of Sam life . The nearest Sam ever got was to say : ‘ Well , sir , if I could grow apples like that , I would call myself a gardener . But it was the singing that went to my heart , if you know what I mean . ’ 
  Frodo sat , eating , drinking , and talking with delight ; but Sam mind was chiefly on the words spoken . Sam knew a little of the elf - speech and listened eagerly . Now and again Sam spoke to those that served Sam and thanked those in those own language . those smiled at Sam and said laughing : ‘ Here is a jewel among hobbits ! ’ 
  After a while Pippin fell fast asleep , and was lifted up and borne away to a bower under the trees ; there Pippin was laid upon a soft bed and slept the rest of the night away . Sam refused to leave Sam master . When Pippin had gone , Sam came and sat curled up at Frodo ’s feet , where at last Sam nodded and closed Sam eyes . Frodo remained long awake , talking with Gildor . 
  feet spoke of many things , old and new , and Frodo questioned Gildor much about happenings in the wide world outside the Shire . The tidings were mostly sad and ominous : of gathering darkness , the wars of Men , and the flight of the Elves . At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest to Sam heart : 
  ‘ Tell me , Gildor , have you ever seen Bilbo since Bilbo left us ? ’ 
  Gildor smiled . ‘ Yes , ’ Sam answered . ‘ Twice . Bilbo said farewell to us on this very spot . But I saw Bilbo once again , far from here . ’ Sam would say no more about Bilbo , and Frodo fell silent . 
  ‘ You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself , Frodo , ’ said Gildor . ‘ But I already know a little , and I can read more in your face and in the thought behind your questions . You are leaving the Shire , and yet you doubt that you will find what you seek , or accomplish what you intend , or that you will ever return . Is not that so ? ’ 
  ‘ that is , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but I thought my going was a secret known only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam . ’ Frodo looked down at Sam , who was snoring gently . 
  ‘ The secret will not reach the Enemy from us , ’ said Gildor . 
  ‘ The Enemy ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Then you know why I am leaving the Shire ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing you , ’ answered Gildor ; ‘ but I perceive that Sam is – strange indeed though that seems to me . And I warn you that peril is now both before you and behind you , and upon either side . ’ 
  ‘ You mean the Riders ? I feared that Riders were servants of the Enemy . What are the Black Riders ? ’ 
  ‘ Has Gandalf told you nothing ? ’ 
  ‘ Nothing about such creatures . ’ 
  ‘ Then I think it is not for me to say more – lest terror should keep you from your journey . For it seems to me that you have set out only just in time , if indeed you are in time . You must now make haste , and neither stay nor turn back ; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you . ’ 
  ‘ I can not imagine what information could be more terrifying than your hints and warnings , ’ exclaimed Frodo . ‘ I knew that danger lay ahead , of course ; but I did not expect to meet that in our own Shire . Ca n’t a hobbit walk from the Water to the River in peace ? ’ 
  ‘ But Water is not your own Shire , ’ said Gildor . ‘ Others dwelt here before hobbits were ; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more . The wide world is all about you : you can fence yourselves in , but you can not for ever fence world out . ’ 
  ‘ I know – and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar . What can I do now ? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly , and make my way to Rivendell ; but now my footsteps are dogged , before ever I get to Buckland . ’ 
  ‘ I think you should still follow that plan , ’ said Gildor . ‘ I do not think the Road will prove too hard for your courage . But if you desire clearer counsel , you should ask Gandalf . I do not know the reason for your flight , and therefore I do not know by what means your pursuers will assail you . These things Gandalf must know . I suppose that you will see counsel before you leave the Shire ? ’ 
  ‘ I hope so . But that is another thing that makes me anxious . I have been expecting Gandalf for many days . Gandalf was to have come to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago ; but Gandalf has never appeared . Now I am wondering what can have happened . Should I wait for Gandalf ? ’ 
  Gildor was silent for a moment . ‘ I do not like this news , ’ Gandalf said at last . ‘ That Gandalf should be late , does not bode well . But it is said : Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards , for Wizards are subtle and quick to anger . The choice is yours : to go or wait . ’ 
  ‘ And choice is also said , ’ answered Frodo : ‘ Go not to the Elves for counsel , for Elves will say both no and yes . ’ 
  ‘ Is choice indeed ? ’ laughed Gildor . ‘ Elves seldom give unguarded advice , for advice is a dangerous gift , even from the wise to the wise , and all courses may run ill . But what would you ? You have not told me all concerning yourself ; and how then shall I choose better than you ? But if you demand advice , I will for friendship ’s sake give advice . I think you should now go at once , without delay ; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out , then I also advise this : do not go alone . Take such friends as are trusty and willing . Now you should be grateful , for I do not give this counsel gladly . The Elves have Elves own labours and Elves own sorrows , and Elves are little concerned with the ways of hobbits , or of any other creatures upon earth . Our paths cross Elves seldom , by chance or purpose . In this meeting there may be more than chance ; but the purpose is not clear to me , and I fear to say too much . ’ 
  ‘ I am deeply grateful , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but I wish you would tell me plainly what the Black Riders are . If I take your advice I may not see Gandalf for a long while , and I ought to know what is the danger that pursues me . ’ 
  ‘ Is it not enough to know that Riders are servants of the Enemy ? ’ answered Gildor . ‘ Flee Riders ! Speak no words to Riders ! Riders are deadly . Ask no more of me ! But my heart forbodes that , ere all is ended , you , Frodo son of Drogo , will know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion . May Elbereth protect you ! ’ 
  ‘ But where shall I find courage ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ That is what I chiefly need . ’ 
  ‘ Courage is found in unlikely places , ’ said Gildor . ‘ Be of good hope ! Sleep now ! In the morning we shall have gone ; but we will send our messages through the lands . The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey , and those that have power for good shall be on the watch . I name you Elf - friend ; and may the stars shine upon the end of your road ! Seldom have we had such delight in strangers , and it is fair to hear words of the Ancient Speech from the lips of other wanderers in the world . ’ 
  Frodo felt sleep coming upon Gildor , even as Gildor finished speaking . ‘ I will sleep now , ’ Frodo said ; and the Elf led Speech to a bower beside Pippin , and Pippin threw Pippin upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber . 
  Chapter 4 
  A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS 
  In the morning Frodo woke refreshed . Pippin was lying in a bower made by a living tree with branches laced and drooping to the ground ; Pippin bed was of fern and grass , deep and soft and strangely fragrant . The sun was shining through the fluttering leaves , which were still green upon the tree . Pippin jumped up and went out . 
  Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood . Pippin was standing studying the sky and weather . There was no sign of the Elves . 
  ‘ Elves have left us fruit and drink , and bread , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Come and have your breakfast . The bread tastes almost as good as bread did last night . I did not want to leave you any , but Sam insisted . ’ 
  Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat . ‘ What is the plan for today ? ’ asked Pippin . 
  ‘ To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible , ’ answered Frodo , and gave Pippin attention to the food . 
  ‘ Do you think we shall see anything of those Riders ? ’ asked Pippin cheerfully . Under the morning sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of sun did not seem very alarming to Pippin . 
  ‘ Yes , probably , ’ said Frodo , not liking the reminder . ‘ But I hope to get across the river without Riders seeing us . ’ 
  ‘ Did you find out anything about Riders from Gildor ? ’ 
  ‘ Not much – only hints and riddles , ’ said Frodo evasively . 
  ‘ Did you ask about the sniffing ? ’ 
  ‘ We did n’t discuss sniffing , ’ said Frodo with Frodo mouth full . 
  ‘ You should have . I am sure sniffing is very important . ’ 
  ‘ In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused to explain sniffing , ’ said Frodo sharply . ‘ And now leave me in peace for a bit ! I do n’t want to answer a string of questions while I am eating . I want to think ! ’ 
  ‘ Good heavens ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ At breakfast ? ’ Pippin walked away towards the edge of the green . 
  From Frodo ’s mind the bright morning – treacherously bright , Pippin thought – had not banished the fear of pursuit ; and Pippin pondered the words of Gildor . The merry voice of Pippin came to Gildor . Gildor was running on the green turf and singing . 
  ‘ No ! I could not ! ’ voice said to voice . ‘ It is one thing to take my young friends walking over the Shire with me , until we are hungry and weary , and food and bed are sweet . To take friends into exile , where hunger and weariness may have no cure , is quite another – even if friends are willing to come . The inheritance is mine alone . I do n’t think I ought even to take Sam . ’ Sam looked at Sam Gamgee , and discovered that Sam was watching Gamgee . 
  ‘ Well , Sam ! ’ Gamgee said . ‘ What about Well ? I am leaving the Shire as soon as ever I can – in fact I have made up my mind now not even to wait a day at Crickhollow , if Crickhollow can be helped . ’ 
  ‘ Very good , sir ! ’ 
  ‘ You still mean to come with me ? ’ 
  ‘ I do . ’ 
  ‘ Crickhollow is going to be very dangerous , Sam . Crickhollow is already dangerous . Most likely neither of us will come back . ’ 
  ‘ If you do n’t come back , sir , then I sha n’t , that ’s certain , ’ said Sam . ‘ Do n’t you leave Sam ! neither said to me . Leave Sam ! I said . I never mean to . I am going with Sam , if Sam climbs to the Moon ; and if any of those Black Riders try to stop Sam , Riders ’ll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with , I said . Riders laughed . ’ 
  ‘ Who are Riders , and what are you talking about ? ’ 
  ‘ The Elves , sir . We had some talk last night ; and Riders seemed to know you were going away , so I did n’t see the use of denying use . Wonderful folk , Elves , sir ! Wonderful ! ’ 
  ‘ Elves are , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Do you like Elves still , now you have had a closer view ? ’ 
  ‘ Elves seem a bit above my likes and dislikes , so to speak , ’ answered Sam slowly . ‘ It do n’t seem to matter what I think about Elves . Elves are quite different from what I expected – so old and young , and so gay and sad , as view were . ’ 
  Frodo looked at Sam rather startled , half expecting to see some outward sign of the odd change that seemed to have come over Sam . Frodo did not sound like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that Sam thought Sam knew . But Frodo looked like the old Sam Gamgee sitting there , except that Gamgee face was unusually thoughtful . 
  ‘ Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now – now that your wish to see Elves has come true already ? ’ Gamgee asked . 
  ‘ Yes , sir . I do n’t know how to say Shire , but after last night I feel different . I seem to see ahead , in a kind of way . I know we are going to take a very long road , into darkness ; but I know I ca n’t turn back . It is n’t to see Elves now , nor dragons , nor mountains , that I want – I do n’t rightly know what I want : but I have something to do before the end , and something lies ahead , not in the Shire . I must see something through , sir , if you understand me . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t altogether . But I understand that Gandalf chose me a good companion . I am content . We will go together . ’ 
  Frodo finished Frodo breakfast in silence . Then standing up Gandalf looked over the land ahead , and called to Pippin . 
  ‘ All ready to start ? ’ Gandalf said as Pippin ran up . ‘ We must be getting off at once . We slept late ; and there are a good many miles to go . ’ 
  ‘ You slept late , you mean , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I was up long before ; and we are only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking . ’ 
  ‘ I have finished both now . And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry as quickly as possible . I am not going out of the way , back to the road we left last night : I am going to cut straight across country from here . ’ 
  ‘ Then you are going to fly , ’ said Pippin . ‘ You wo n’t cut straight on foot anywhere in this country . ’ 
  ‘ We can cut straighter than the road anyway , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ The Ferry is east from Woodhall ; but the hard road curves away to the left – you can see a bend of Woodhall away north over there . Woodhall goes round the north end of the Marish so as to strike the causeway from the Bridge above Stock . But that is miles out of the way . We could save a quarter of the distance if we made a line for the Ferry from where we stand . ’ 
  ‘ Short cuts make long delays , ’ argued Pippin . ‘ The country is rough round here , and there are bogs and all kinds of difficulties down in the Marish – I know the land in these parts . And if you are worrying about Black Riders , I ca n’t see that land is any worse meeting Riders on a road than in a wood or a field . ’ 
  ‘ land is less easy to find people in the woods and fields , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ And if you are supposed to be on the road , there is some chance that you will be looked for on the road and not off chance . ’ 
  ‘ All right ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ I will follow you into every bog and ditch . But bog is hard ! I had counted on passing the Golden Perch at Stock before sundown . The best beer in the Eastfarthing , or used to be : it is a long time since I tasted Eastfarthing . ’ 
  ‘ That settles Eastfarthing ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Short cuts make delays , but inns make longer ones . At all costs we must keep you away from the Golden Perch . We want to get to Bucklebury before dark . What do you say , Sam ? ’ 
  ‘ I will go along with you , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam ( in spite of private misgivings and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing ) . 
  ‘ Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar , let ’s go now ! ’ said Pippin . 
  spite was already nearly as hot as spite had been the day before ; but clouds were beginning to come up from the West . It looked likely to turn to rain . The hobbits scrambled down a steep green bank and plunged into the thick trees below . hobbits course had been chosen to leave Woodhall to hobbits left , and to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side of the hills , until hobbits reached the flats beyond . Then hobbits could make straight for the Ferry over country that was open , except for a few ditches and fences . Frodo reckoned hobbits had eighteen miles to go in a straight line . 
  Ferry soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than thicket had appeared . There were no paths in the undergrowth , and paths did not get on very fast . When paths had struggled to the bottom of the bank , paths found a stream running down from the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with steep slippery sides overhung with brambles . Most inconveniently stream cut across the line paths had chosen . paths could not jump over stream , nor indeed get across stream at all without getting wet , scratched , and muddy . paths halted , wondering what to do . ‘ First check ! ’ said Pippin , smiling grimly . 
  Sam Gamgee looked back . Through an opening in the trees Gamgee caught a glimpse of the top of the green bank from which trees had climbed down . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ Gamgee said , clutching Frodo by the arm . trees all looked , and on the edge high above trees trees saw against the sky a horse standing . Beside horse stooped a black figure . 
  trees at once gave up any idea of going back . Frodo led the way , and plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the stream . ‘ Whew ! ’ Gamgee said to Pippin . ‘ We were both right ! The short cut has gone crooked already ; but we got under cover only just in time . You ’ ve got sharp ears , Sam : can you hear anything coming ? ’ 
  trees stood still , almost holding trees breath as trees listened ; but there was no sound of pursuit . ‘ I do n’t fancy Gamgee would try bringing Gamgee horse down that bank , ’ said Sam . ‘ But I guess Gamgee knows we came down bank . We had better be going on . ’ 
  Going on was not altogether easy . trees had packs to carry , and the bushes and brambles were reluctant to let trees through . trees were cut off from the wind by the ridge behind , and the air was still and stuffy . When trees forced trees way at last into more open ground , trees were hot and tired and very scratched , and trees were also no longer certain of the direction in which trees were going . The banks of the stream sank , as stream reached the levels and became broader and shallower , wandering off towards the Marish and the River . 
  ‘ Why , this is the Stock - brook ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ If we are going to try and get back on to our course , we must cross at once and bear right . ’ 
  banks waded the stream , and hurried over a wide open space , rush - grown and treeless , on the further side . Beyond that banks came again to a belt of trees : tall oaks , for the most part , with here and there an elm tree or an ash . The ground was fairly level , and there was little undergrowth ; but the trees were too close for trees to see far ahead . The leaves blew upwards in sudden gusts of wind , and spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky . Then the wind died away and the rain came streaming down . leaves trudged along as fast as leaves could , over patches of grass , and through thick drifts of old leaves ; and all about spots the rain pattered and trickled . spots did not talk , but kept glancing back , and from side to side . 
  After half an hour Pippin said : ‘ I hope we have not turned too much towards the south , and are not walking longwise through this wood ! longwise is not a very broad belt – I should have said no more than a mile at the widest – and we ought to have been through longwise by now . ’ 
  ‘ It is no good our starting to go in zig - zags , ’ said Frodo . ‘ That wo n’t mend matters . Let us keep on as we are going ! I am not sure that I want to come out into the open yet . ’ 
  matters went on for perhaps another couple of miles . Then the sun gleamed out of ragged clouds again and the rain lessened . It was now past mid - day , and matters felt - was high time for lunch . matters halted under an elm tree : tree leaves though fast turning yellow were still thick , and the ground at tree feet was fairly dry and sheltered . When matters came to make matters meal , matters found that the Elves had filled matters bottles with a clear drink , pale golden in colour : meal had the scent of a honey made of many flowers , and was wonderfully refreshing . Very soon matters were laughing , and snapping matters fingers at rain , and at Black Riders . The last few miles , matters felt , would soon be behind matters . 
  Frodo propped Frodo back against the tree - trunk , and closed back eyes . Sam and Pippin sat near , and Sam began to hum , and then to sing softly : 
  Ho ! Ho ! Ho ! to the bottle I go 
  To heal my heart and drown my woe . 
  Rain may fall and wind may blow , 
  And many miles be still to go , 
  But under a tall tree I will lie , 
  And let the clouds go sailing by . 
  Ho ! Ho ! Ho ! miles began again louder . miles stopped short suddenly . Frodo sprang to Frodo feet . A long - drawn wail came down the wind , like the cry of some evil and lonely creature . wail rose and fell , and ended on a high piercing note . Even as miles sat and stood , as if suddenly frozen , it was answered by another cry , fainter and further off , but no less chilling to the blood . There was then a silence , broken only by the sound of the wind in the leaves . 
  ‘ And what do you think that was ? ’ Pippin asked at last , trying to speak lightly , but quavering a little . ‘ If that was a bird , it was one that I never heard in the Shire before . ’ 
  ‘ that was not bird or beast , ’ said Frodo . ‘ that was a call , or a signal – there were words in that cry , though I could not catch words . But no hobbit has such a voice . ’ 
  No more was said about hobbit . words were all thinking of the Riders , but no one spoke of words . words were now reluctant either to stay or go on ; but sooner or later words had got to get across the open country to the Ferry , and it was best to go sooner and in daylight . In a few moments words had shouldered words packs again and were off . 
  Before long the wood came to a sudden end . Wide grass - lands stretched before words . words now saw that words had , in fact , turned too much to the south . Away over the flats words could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury across the River , but Bucklebury was now to words left . Creeping cautiously out from the edge of the trees , words set off across the open as quickly as words could . 
  At first words felt afraid , away from the shelter of the wood . Far back behind words stood the high place where words had breakfasted . Frodo half expected to see the small distant figure of a horseman on the ridge dark against the sky ; but there was no sign of one . The sun escaping from the breaking clouds , as sun sank towards the hills hills had left , was now shining brightly again . hills fear left hills , though hills still felt uneasy . But the land became steadily more tame and well - ordered . Soon hills came into well - tended fields and meadows : there were hedges and gates and dikes for drainage . Everything seemed quiet and peaceful , just an ordinary corner of the Shire . hills spirits rose with every step . The line of the River grew nearer ; and the Black Riders began to seem like phantoms of the woods now left far behind . 
  Riders passed along the edge of a huge turnip - field , and came to a stout gate . Beyond gate a rutted lane ran between low well - laid hedges towards a distant clump of trees . Pippin stopped . 
  ‘ I know these fields and this gate ! ’ Pippin said . ‘ This is Bamfurlong , old Farmer Maggot ’s land . That ’s Maggot farm away there in the trees . ’ 
  ‘ One trouble after another ! ’ said Frodo , looking nearly as much alarmed as if Pippin had declared the lane was the slot leading to a dragon ’s den . The others looked at Pippin in surprise . 
  ‘ What ’s wrong with old Maggot ? ’ asked Pippin . ‘ Pippin ’s a good friend to all the Brandybucks . Of course Pippin ’s a terror to trespassers , and keeps ferocious dogs – but after all , folk down here are near the border and have to be more on trespassers guard . ’ 
  ‘ I know , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But all the same , ’ Frodo added with a shamefaced laugh , ‘ I am terrified of Pippin and Pippin dogs . I have avoided Pippin farm for years and years . Pippin caught me several times trespassing after mushrooms , when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall . On the last occasion Pippin beat me , and then took me and showed me to Pippin dogs . “ See , lads , ” Pippin said , “ next time this young varmint sets foot on my land , you can eat varmint . Now see varmint off ! ” dogs chased me all the way to the Ferry . I have never got over the fright – though I daresay the beasts knew beasts business and would not really have touched me . ’ 
  Pippin laughed . ‘ Well , business ’s time you made business up . Especially if you are coming back to live in Buckland . Old Maggot is really a stout fellow – if you leave Ferry mushrooms alone . Let ’s get into the lane and then we sha n’t be trespassing . If we meet Ferry , I ’ll do the talking . Ferry is a friend of Merry ’s , and I used to come here with Ferry a good deal at one time . ’ 
  friend went along the lane , until friend saw the thatched roofs of a large house and farm - buildings peeping out among the trees ahead . The Maggots , and the Puddifoots of Stock , and most of the inhabitants of the Marish , were house - dwellers ; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall all round wall . There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the wall into the lane . 
  Suddenly as dwellers drew nearer a terrific baying and barking broke out , and a loud voice was heard shouting : ‘ Grip ! Fang ! Wolf ! Come on , lads ! ’ 
  Frodo and Sam stopped dead , but Pippin walked on a few paces . The gate opened and three huge dogs came pelting out into the lane , and dashed towards the travellers , barking fiercely . dogs took no notice of Pippin ; but Sam shrank against the wall , while two wolvish - looking dogs sniffed at Sam suspiciously , and snarled if Sam moved . The largest and most ferocious of the three halted in front of Frodo , bristling and growling . 
  Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick - set hobbit with a round red face . ‘ Hallo ! Hallo ! And who may you be , and what may you be wanting ? ’ Sam asked . 
  ‘ Good afternoon , Mr. Maggot ! ’ said Pippin . 
  The farmer looked at Sam closely . ‘ Well , if afternoon is n’t Master Pippin – Mr. Peregrin Took , I should say ! ’ Sam cried , changing from a scowl to a grin . ‘ afternoon ’s a long time since I saw you round here . afternoon ’s lucky for you that I know you . I was just going out to set my dogs on any strangers . There are some funny things going on today . Of course , we do get queer folk wandering in these parts at times . Too near the River , ’ he said , shaking he head . ‘ But this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes on . River wo n’t cross my land without leave a second time , not if I can stop fellow . ’ 
  ‘ What fellow do you mean ? ’ asked Pippin . 
  ‘ Then you have n’t seen River ? ’ said the farmer . ‘ River went up the lane towards the causeway not a long while back . River was a funny customer and asking funny questions . But perhaps you ’ll come along inside , and we ’ll pass the news more comfortable . I ’ ve a drop of good ale on tap , if you and your friends are willing , Mr. Took . ’ 
  It seemed plain that the farmer would tell Took more , if allowed to do invitation in farmer own time and fashion , so time all accepted the invitation . ‘ What about the dogs ? ’ asked Frodo anxiously . 
  The farmer laughed . ‘ dogs wo n’t harm you – not unless I tell ’em to . Here , Grip ! Fang ! Heel ! ’ Fang cried . ‘ Heel , Wolf ! ’ To the relief of Frodo and Sam , the dogs walked away and let dogs go free . 
  Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer . ‘ Mr. Frodo Baggins , ’ Sam said . ‘ You may not remember Baggins , but Baggins used to live at Brandy Hall . ’ At the name Baggins the farmer started , and gave Frodo a sharp glance . For a moment Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused , and that the dogs would be told to see Frodo off . But Farmer Maggot took Frodo by the arm . 
  ‘ Well , if that is n’t queerer than ever ! ’ Frodo exclaimed . ‘ Mr. Baggins is that ? Come inside ! We must have a talk . ’ 
  Baggins went into the farmer ’s kitchen , and sat by the wide fire - place . Mrs. Maggot brought out beer in a huge jug , and filled four large mugs . beer was a good brew , and Pippin found Pippin more than compensated for missing the Golden Perch . Sam sipped Sam beer suspiciously . Sam had a natural mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire ; and also Sam was not disposed to be quick friends with anyone who had beaten Sam master , however long ago . 
  After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural prospects ( which were no worse than usual ) , Farmer Maggot put down Maggot mug and looked at remarks all in turn . 
  ‘ Now , Mr. Peregrin , ’ Maggot said , ‘ where might you be coming from , and where might you be going to ? Were you coming to visit me ? For , if so , you had gone past my gate without my seeing you . ’ 
  ‘ Well , no , ’ answered Pippin . ‘ To tell you the truth , since you have guessed truth , we got into the lane from the other end : we had come over your fields . But that was quite by accident . We lost our way in the woods , back near Woodhall , trying to take a short cut to the Ferry . ’ 
  ‘ If you were in a hurry , the road would have served you better , ’ said the farmer . ‘ But I was n’t worrying about that . You have leave to walk over my land , if you have a mind , Mr. Peregrin . And you , Mr. Baggins – though I daresay you still like mushrooms . ’ Baggins laughed . ‘ Ah yes , I recognized the name . I recollect the time when young Frodo Baggins was one of the worst young rascals of Buckland . But it was n’t mushrooms I was thinking of . I had just heard the name Baggins before you turned up . What do you think that funny customer asked me ? ’ 
  customer waited anxiously for Baggins to go on . ‘ Well , ’ the farmer continued , approaching Baggins point with slow relish , ‘ Baggins came riding on a big black horse in at the gate , which happened to be open , and right up to my door . All black Baggins was Baggins , too , and cloaked and hooded up , as if Baggins did not want to be known . “ Now what in the Shire can Baggins want ? ” I thought to myself . We do n’t see many of the Big Folk over the border ; and anyway I had never heard of any like this black fellow . 
  ‘ “ Good - day to you ! ” I says , going out to Baggins . “ This lane do n’t lead anywhere , and wherever you may be going , your quickest way will be back to the road . ” I did n’t like the looks of Baggins ; and when Grip came out , Baggins took one sniff and let out a yelp as if Baggins had been stung : Baggins put down Baggins tail and bolted off howling . The black fellow sat quite still . 
  ‘ “ I come from yonder , ” Baggins said , slow and stiff - like , pointing back west , over my fields , if you please . “ Have you seen Baggins ? ” Baggins asked in a queer voice , and bent down towards me . I could not see any face , for Baggins hood fell down so low ; and I felt a sort of shiver down my back . But I did not see why Baggins should come riding over my land so bold . 
  ‘ “ Be off ! ” I said . “ There are no Bagginses here . You ’re in the wrong part of the Shire . You had better go back west to Hobbiton – but you can go by road this time . ” 
  ‘ “ Baggins has left , ” Baggins answered in a whisper . “ Baggins is coming . Baggins is not far away . I wish to find Baggins . If Baggins passes will you tell me ? I will come back with gold . ” 
  ‘ “ No you wo n’t , ” I said . “ You ’ll go back where you belong , double quick . I give you one minute before I call all my dogs . ” 
  ‘ Baggins gave a sort of hiss . hiss might have been laughing , and hiss might not . Then Baggins spurred Baggins great horse right at me , and I jumped out of the way only just in time . I called the dogs , but Baggins swung off , and rode through the gate and up the lane towards the causeway like a bolt of thunder . What do you think of that ? ’ 
  Frodo sat for a moment looking at the fire , but Frodo only thought was how on earth would dogs reach the Ferry . ‘ I do n’t know what to think , ’ Ferry said at last . 
  ‘ Then I ’ll tell you what to think , ’ said Maggot . ‘ You should never have gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk , Mr. Frodo . Folk are queer up there . ’ Sam stirred in Sam chair , and looked at the farmer with an unfriendly eye . ‘ But you were always a reckless lad . When I heard you had left the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo , I said that you were going to find trouble . Mark my words , this all comes of those strange doings of Mr. Bilbo ’s . Bilbo money was got in some strange fashion in foreign parts , parts say . Maybe there is some that want to know what has become of the gold and jewels that Bilbo buried in the hill of Hobbiton , as I hear ? ’ 
  Frodo said nothing : the shrewd guesses of the farmer were rather disconcerting . 
  ‘ Well , Mr. Frodo , ’ Maggot went on , ‘ I ’ m glad that you ’ ve had the sense to come back to Buckland . My advice is : stay there ! And do n’t get mixed up with these outlandish folk . You ’ll have friends in these parts . If any of these black fellows come after you again , I ’ll deal with fellows . I ’ll say you ’re dead , or have left the Shire , or anything you like . And that might be true enough ; for as like as not that is old Mr. Bilbo fellows want news of . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe you ’re right , ’ said Frodo , avoiding the farmer ’s eye and staring at the fire . 
  Maggot looked at Frodo thoughtfully . ‘ Well , I see you have ideas of your own , ’ Frodo said . ‘ that is as plain as my nose that no accident brought you and that rider here on the same afternoon ; and maybe my news was no great news to you , after all . I am not asking you to tell me anything you have a mind to keep to yourself ; but I see you are in some kind of trouble . Perhaps you are thinking mind wo n’t be too easy to get to the Ferry without being caught ? ’ 
  ‘ I was thinking so , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But we have got to try and get there ; and mind wo n’t be done by sitting and thinking . So I am afraid we must be going . Thank you very much indeed for your kindness ! I ’ ve been in terror of you and your dogs for over thirty years , Farmer Maggot , though you may laugh to hear terror . terror ’s a pity : for I ’ ve missed a good friend . And now I ’ m sorry to leave so soon . But I ’ll come back , perhaps , one day – if I get a chance . ’ 
  ‘ You ’ll be welcome when you come , ’ said Maggot . ‘ But now I ’ ve a notion . notion ’s near sundown already , and we are going to have our supper ; for we mostly go to bed soon after the Sun . If you and Mr. Peregrin and all could stay and have a bite with us , we would be pleased ! ’ 
  ‘ And so should we ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ But we must be going at once , I ’ m afraid . Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry . ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! but wait a minute ! I was going to say : after a bit of supper , I ’ll get out a small waggon , and I ’ll drive you all to the Ferry . That will save you a good step , and That might also save you trouble of another sort . ’ 
  Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully , to the relief of Pippin and Sam . The sun was already behind the western hills , and the light was failing . Two of Maggot ’s sons and Sam three daughters came in , and a generous supper was laid on the large table . The kitchen was lit with candles and the fire was mended . Mrs. Maggot bustled in and out . One or two other hobbits belonging to the farm - household came in . In a short while fourteen sat down to eat . There was beer in plenty , and a mighty dish of mushrooms and bacon , besides much other solid farmhouse fare . The dogs lay by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones . 
  When farmer had finished , the farmer and farmer sons went out with a lantern and got the waggon ready . It was dark in the yard , when the guests came out . guests threw guests packs on board and climbed in . The farmer sat in the driving - seat , and whipped up farmer two stout ponies . farmer wife stood in the light of the open door . 
  ‘ You be careful of yourself , Maggot ! ’ wife called . ‘ Do n’t go arguing with any foreigners , and come straight back ! ’ 
  ‘ I will ! ’ said light , and drove out of the gate . There was now no breath of wind stirring ; the night was still and quiet , and a chill was in the air . foreigners went without lights and took chill slowly . After a mile or two the lane came to an end , crossing a deep dike , and climbing a short slope up on to the high - banked causeway . 
  Maggot got down and took a good look either way , north and south , but nothing could be seen in the darkness , and there was not a sound in the still air . Thin strands of river - mist were hanging above the dikes , and crawling over the fields . 
  ‘ mist ’s going to be thick , ’ said Maggot ; ‘ but I ’ll not light my lanterns till I turn for home . We ’ll hear anything on the road long before we meet road tonight . ’ 
  mist was five miles or more from Maggot ’s lane to the Ferry . The hobbits wrapped hobbits up , but hobbits ears were strained for any sound above the creak of the wheels and the slow clop of the ponies ’ hoofs . The waggon seemed slower than a snail to Frodo . Beside snail Pippin was nodding towards sleep ; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog . 
  hobbits reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last . entrance was marked by two tall white posts that suddenly loomed up on posts right . Farmer Maggot drew in Maggot ponies and the waggon creaked to a halt . posts were just beginning to scramble out , when suddenly posts heard what posts had all been dreading : hoofs on the road ahead . The sound was coming towards posts . 
  Maggot jumped down and stood holding the ponies ’ heads , and peering forward into the gloom . Clip - clop , clip - clop came the approaching rider . The fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still , foggy air . 
  ‘ You ’d better be hidden , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam anxiously . ‘ You get down in the waggon and cover up with blankets , and we ’ll send this rider to the rightabouts ! ’ Sam climbed out and went to the farmer ’s side . Black Riders would have to ride over Sam to get near the waggon . 
  Clop - clop , clop - clop . The rider was nearly on Riders . 
  ‘ Hallo there ! ’ called Farmer Maggot . The advancing hoofs stopped short . hoofs thought hoofs could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist , a yard or two ahead . 
  ‘ Now then ! ’ said the farmer , throwing the reins to Sam and striding forward . ‘ Do n’t you come a step nearer ! What do you want , and where are you going ? ’ 
  ‘ I want Mr. Baggins . Have you seen Baggins ? ’ said a muffled voice – but the voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck . A dark lantern was uncovered , and lantern light fell on the astonished face of the farmer . 
  ‘ Mr. Merry ! ’ Brandybuck cried . 
  ‘ Yes , of course ! Who did you think course was ? ’ said Merry coming forward . As Brandybuck came out of the mist and farmer fears subsided , Brandybuck seemed suddenly to diminish to ordinary hobbit - size . Brandybuck was riding a pony , and a scarf was swathed round Brandybuck neck and over Brandybuck chin to keep out the fog . 
  Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet Brandybuck . ‘ So there you are at last ! ’ said Merry . ‘ I was beginning to wonder if you would turn up at all today , and I was just going back to supper . When supper grew foggy I came across and rode up towards Stock to see if you had fallen in any ditches . But I ’ m blest if I know which way you have come . Where did you find ditches , Mr. Maggot ? In your duck - pond ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I caught ’em trespassing , ’ said the farmer , ‘ and nearly set my dogs on ’em ; but dogs ’ll tell you all the story , I ’ ve no doubt . Now , if you ’ll excuse me , Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and all , I ’d best be turning for home . Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick . ’ 
  Maggot backed the waggon into the lane and turned waggon . ‘ Well , good night to you all , ’ Frodo said . ‘ night ’s been a queer day , and no mistake . But all ’s well as ends well ; though perhaps we should not say that until we reach our own doors . I ’ll not deny that I ’ll be glad now when I do . ’ Frodo lit Frodo lanterns , and got up . Suddenly Frodo produced a large basket from under the seat . ‘ I was nearly forgetting , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Mrs. Maggot put this up for Mr. Baggins , with Maggot compliments . ’ Frodo handed basket down and moved off , followed by a chorus of thanks and good - nights . 
  thanks watched the pale rings of light round Frodo lanterns as thanks dwindled into the foggy night . Suddenly Frodo laughed : from the covered basket Frodo held , the scent of mushrooms was rising . 
  Chapter 5 
  A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED 
  ‘ Now we had better get home ourselves , ’ said Merry . ‘ There ’s something funny about all this , I see ; but this must wait till we get in . ’ 
  thanks turned down the Ferry lane , which was straight and well - kept and edged with large white - washed stones . In a hundred yards or so a brought thanks to the river - bank , where there was a broad wooden landing - stage . A large flat ferry - boat was moored beside a . The white bollards near the water ’s edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts . Behind bollards the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges ; but the water before bollards was dark , with only a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by the bank . There seemed to be less fog on the further side . 
  Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry , and the others followed . Merry then pushed slowly off with a long pole . The Brandywine flowed slow and broad before others . On the other side the bank was steep , and up bank a winding path climbed from the further landing . Lamps were twinkling there . Behind loomed up the Buck Hill ; and out of Hill , through stray shrouds of mist , shone many round windows , yellow and red . windows were the windows of Brandy Hall , the ancient home of the Brandybucks . 
  Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck , head of the Oldbuck family , one of the oldest in the Marish or indeed in the Shire , had crossed the river , which was the original boundary of the land eastwards . Oldbuck built ( and excavated ) Brandy Hall , changed Oldbuck name to Brandybuck , and settled down to become master of what was virtually a small independent country . Oldbuck family grew and grew , and after Oldbuck days continued to grow , until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of the low hill , and had three large front - doors , many side - doors , and about a hundred windows . The Brandybucks and Brandybucks numerous dependants then began to burrow , and later to build , all round about . That was the origin of Buckland , a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old Forest , a sort of colony from the Shire . That chief village was Bucklebury , clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall . 
  The people in the Marish were friendly with the Bucklanders , and the authority of the Master of the Hall ( as the head of the Brandybuck family was called ) was still acknowledged by the farmers between Stock and Rushey . But most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar , half foreigners as folk were . Though , as a matter of fact , Bucklanders were not very different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings . Except in one point : Bucklanders were fond of boats , and some of Bucklanders could swim . 
  Bucklanders land was originally unprotected from the East ; but on that side Bucklanders had built a hedge : the High Hay . land had been planted many generations ago , and was now thick and tall , for land was constantly tended . land ran all the way from Brandywine Bridge , in a big loop curving away from the river , to Haysend ( where the Withywindle flowed out of the Forest into the Brandywine ): well over twenty miles from end to end . But , of course , Withywindle was not a complete protection . The Forest drew close to the hedge in many places . The Bucklanders kept Bucklanders doors locked after dark , and that also was not usual in the Shire . 
  The ferry - boat moved slowly across the water . The Buckland shore drew nearer . Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river before . Sam had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by : Sam old life lay behind in the mists , dark adventure lay in front . Sam scratched Sam head , and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone on living quietly at Bag End . 
  The four hobbits stepped off the ferry . Merry was tying ferry up , and Pippin was already leading the pony up the path , when Sam ( who had been looking back , as if to take farewell of the Shire ) said in a hoarse whisper : 
  ‘ Look back , Mr. Frodo ! Do you see anything ? ’ 
  On the far stage , under the distant lamps , hobbits could just make out a figure : stage looked like a dark black bundle left behind . But as hobbits looked it seemed to move and sway this way and that , as if searching the ground . stage then crawled , or went crouching , back into the gloom beyond the lamps . 
  ‘ What in the Shire is that ? ’ exclaimed Merry . 
  ‘ Something that is following us , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But do n’t ask any more now ! Let ’s get away at once ! ’ lamps hurried up the path to the top of the bank , but when lamps looked back the far shore was shrouded in mist , and nothing could be seen . 
  ‘ Thank goodness you do n’t keep any boats on the west - bank ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Can horses cross the river ? ’ 
  ‘ horses can go ten miles north to Brandywine Bridge – or horses might swim , ’ answered Merry . ‘ Though I never heard of any horse swimming the Brandywine . But what have horses to do with Brandywine ? ’ 
  ‘ I ’ll tell you later . Let ’s get indoors and then we can talk . ’ 
  ‘ All right ! You and Pippin know your way ; so I ’ll just ride on and tell Fatty Bolger that you are coming . We ’ll see about supper and things . ’ 
  ‘ We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but we could do with another . ’ 
  ‘ You shall have another ! Give me that basket ! ’ said Merry , and rode ahead into the darkness . 
  darkness was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo ’s new house at Crickhollow . Frodo passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on Hill left , and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south from the Bridge . Half a mile northward along this Hill came to a lane opening on Hill right . This Hill followed for a couple of miles as This climbed up and down into the country . 
  At last Hill came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge . Nothing could be seen of the house in the dark : house stood back from the lane in the middle of a wide circle of lawn surrounded by a belt of low trees inside the outer hedge . Frodo had chosen house , because house stood in an out - of - the - way corner of the country , and there were no other dwellings close by . You could get in and out without being noticed . house had been built a long while before by the Brandybucks , for the use of guests , or members of the family that wished to escape from the crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time . house was an old - fashioned countrified house , as much like a hobbit - hole as possible : it was long and low , with no upper storey ; and house had a roof of turf , round windows , and a large round door . 
  As windows walked up the green path from the gate no light was visible ; the windows were dark and shuttered . Frodo knocked on the door , and Fatty Bolger opened door . A friendly light streamed out . light slipped in quickly and shut light and the light inside . light were in a wide hall with doors on either side ; in front of light a passage ran back down the middle of the house . 
  ‘ Well , what do you think of house ? ’ asked Merry coming up the passage . ‘ We have done our best in a short time to make it look like home . After all Fatty and I only got here with the last cart - load yesterday . ’ 
  Frodo looked round . Frodo did look like home . Many of Merry own favourite things – or Bilbo ’s things ( things reminded Merry sharply of Merry in things new setting ) – were arranged as nearly as possible as things had been at Bag End . It was a pleasant , comfortable , welcoming place ; and Merry found Merry wishing that Merry was really coming here to settle down in quiet retirement . It seemed unfair to have put Merry friends to all this trouble ; and Merry wondered again how Merry was going to break the news to friends that Merry must leave friends so soon , indeed at once . Yet that would have to be done that very night , before friends all went to bed . 
  ‘ that ’s delightful ! ’ Merry said with an effort . ‘ I hardly feel that I have moved at all . ’ 
  The travellers hung up travellers cloaks , and piled travellers packs on the floor . Merry led travellers down the passage and threw open a door at the far end . Firelight came out , and a puff of steam . 
  ‘ A bath ! ’ cried Pippin . ‘ O blessed Meriadoc ! ’ 
  ‘ Which order shall we go in ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Eldest first , or quickest first ? You ’ll be last either way , Master Peregrin . ’ 
  ‘ Trust me to arrange things better than that ! ’ said Merry . ‘ We ca n’t begin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths . In that room there are three tubs , and a copper full of boiling water . There are also towels , mats and soap . Get inside , and be quick ! ’ 
  Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage , and busied Merry with the final preparations for a late supper . Snatches of competing songs came from the bathroom mixed with the sound of splashing and wallowing . The voice of Pippin was suddenly lifted up above the others in one of Bilbo ’s favourite bath - songs . 
  Sing hey ! for the bath at close of day 
  that washes the weary mud away ! 
  A loon is Bilbo that will not sing : 
  O ! Water Hot is a noble thing ! 
  O ! Sweet is the sound of falling rain , 
  and the brook that leaps from hill to plain ; 
  but better than rain or rippling streams 
  is Water Hot that smokes and steams . 
  O ! Water cold we may pour at need 
  down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed ; 
  but better is Beer , if drink we lack , 
  and Water Hot poured down the back . 
  O ! Water is fair that leaps on high 
  in a fountain white beneath the sky ; 
  but never did fountain sound so sweet 
  as splashing Hot Water with my feet ! 
  There was a terrific splash , and a shout of Whoa ! from Frodo . Whoa appeared that a lot of Pippin ’s bath had imitated a fountain and leaped on high . 
  Merry went to the door : ‘ What about supper and beer in the throat ? ’ Pippin called . Frodo came out drying Pippin hair . 
  ‘ There ’s so much water in the air that I ’ m coming into the kitchen to finish , ’ Pippin said . 
  ‘ Lawks ! ’ said Merry , looking in . The stone floor was swimming . ‘ You ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat , Peregrin , ’ Pippin said . ‘ Hurry up , or we sha n’t wait for you . ’ 
  Lawks had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire . ‘ I suppose you three wo n’t want mushrooms again ? ’ said Fredegar without much hope . 
  ‘ Yes we shall ! ’ cried Pippin . 
  ‘ mushrooms ’re mine ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Given to me by Mrs. Maggot , a queen among farmers ’ wives . Take your greedy hands away , and I ’ll serve hands . ’ 
  Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms , surpassing even the greediest likings of Big People . A fact which partly explains young Frodo ’s long expeditions to the renowned fields of the Marish , and the wrath of the injured Maggot . On this occasion there was plenty for all , even according to hobbit standards . There were also many other things to follow , and when things had finished even Fatty Bolger heaved a sigh of content . things pushed back the table , and drew chairs round the fire . 
  ‘ We ’ll clear up later , ’ said Merry . ‘ Now tell me all about all ! I guess that you have been having adventures , which was not quite fair without me . I want a full account ; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with old Maggot , and why Maggot spoke to me like that . Merry sounded almost as if Pippin was scared , if that is possible . ’ 
  ‘ We have all been scared , ’ said Pippin after a pause , in which Frodo stared at the fire and did not speak . ‘ You would have been , too , if you had been chased for two days by Black Riders . ’ 
  ‘ And what are Riders ? ’ 
  ‘ Black figures riding on black horses , ’ answered Pippin . ‘ If Frodo wo n’t talk , I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning . ’ Pippin then gave a full account of Riders journey from the time when Riders left Hobbiton . Sam gave various supporting nods and exclamations . Frodo remained silent . 
  ‘ I should think you were making tale all up , ’ said Merry , ‘ if I had not seen that black shape on the landing - stage – and heard the queer sound in Maggot ’s voice . What do you make of Maggot all , Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ Cousin Frodo has been very close , ’ said Pippin . ‘ But the time has come for Frodo to open out . So far we have been given nothing more to go on than Farmer Maggot ’s guess that That has something to do with old Bilbo ’s treasure . ’ 
  ‘ That was only a guess , ’ said Frodo hastily . ‘ Maggot does not know anything . ’ 
  ‘ Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow , ’ said Merry . ‘ A lot goes on behind Maggot round face that does not come out in Maggot talk . I ’ ve heard that Maggot used to go into the Old Forest at one time , and Maggot has the reputation of knowing a good many strange things . But you can at least tell us , Frodo , whether you think Maggot guess good or bad . ’ 
  ‘ I think , ’ answered Frodo slowly , ‘ that reputation was a good guess , as far as reputation goes . There is a connexion with Bilbo ’s old adventures , and the Riders are looking , or perhaps one ought to say searching , for Bilbo or for me . I also fear , if you want to know , that it is no joke at all ; and that I am not safe here or anywhere else . ’ Frodo looked round at the windows and walls , as if Frodo was afraid windows would suddenly give way . The others looked at Frodo in silence , and exchanged meaning glances among others . 
  ‘ joke ’s coming out in a minute , ’ whispered Pippin to Merry . Merry nodded . 
  ‘ Well ! ’ said Frodo at last , sitting up and straightening Frodo back , as if Frodo had made a decision . ‘ I ca n’t keep Well dark any longer . I have got something to tell you all . But I do n’t know quite how to begin . ’ 
  ‘ I think I could help you , ’ said Merry quietly , ‘ by telling you some of Well myself . ’ 
  ‘ What do you mean ? ’ said Frodo , looking at Merry anxiously . 
  ‘ Just this , my dear old Frodo : you are miserable , because you do n’t know how to say good - bye . You meant to leave the Shire , of course . But danger has come on you sooner than you expected , and now you are making up your mind to go at once . And you do n’t want to . We are very sorry for you . ’ 
  Frodo opened Frodo mouth and shut mouth again . mind look of surprise was so comical that Shire laughed . ‘ Dear old Frodo ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Did you really think you had thrown dust in all our eyes ? You have not been nearly careful or clever enough for that ! You have obviously been planning to go and saying farewell to all your haunts all this year since April . We have constantly heard you muttering : “ Shall I ever look down into that valley again , I wonder ” , and things like that . And pretending that you had come to the end of your money , and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those Sackville - Bagginses ! And all those close talks with Gandalf . ’ 
  ‘ Good heavens ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I thought I had been both careful and clever . I do n’t know what Gandalf would say . Is all the Shire discussing my departure then ? ’ 
  ‘ Oh no ! ’ said Merry . ‘ Do n’t worry about that ! The secret wo n’t keep for long , of course ; but at present secret is , I think , only known to us conspirators . After all , you must remember that we know you well , and are often with you . We can usually guess what you are thinking . I knew Bilbo , too . To tell you the truth , I have been watching you rather closely ever since Bilbo left . I thought you would go after Bilbo sooner or later ; indeed I expected you to go sooner , and lately we have been very anxious . We have been terrified that you might give us the slip , and go off suddenly , all on your own like Bilbo did . Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open , and done a good deal of planning on our own account . You are not going to escape so easily ! ’ 
  ‘ But I must go , ’ said Frodo . ‘ deal can not be helped , dear friends . deal is wretched for us all , but it is no use your trying to keep me . Since you have guessed so much , please help me and do not hinder me ! ’ 
  ‘ You do not understand ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ You must go – and therefore we must , too . Merry and I are coming with you . Sam is an excellent fellow , and would jump down a dragon ’s throat to save you , if Sam did not trip over Sam own feet ; but you will need more than one companion in your dangerous adventure . ’ 
  ‘ My dear and most beloved hobbits ! ’ said Frodo deeply moved . ‘ But I could not allow adventure . I decided that long ago , too . You speak of danger , but you do not understand . This is no treasure - hunt , no there - and - back journey . I am flying from deadly peril into deadly peril . ’ 
  ‘ Of course we understand , ’ said Merry firmly . ‘ That is why we have decided to come . We know the Ring is no laughing - matter ; but we are going to do our best to help you against the Enemy . ’ 
  ‘ The Ring ! ’ said Frodo , now completely amazed . 
  ‘ Yes , the Ring , ’ said Merry . ‘ My dear old hobbit , you do n’t allow for the inquisitiveness of friends . I have known about the existence of the Ring for years – before Bilbo went away , in fact ; but since Bilbo obviously regarded knowledge as secret , I kept the knowledge in my head , until we formed our conspiracy . I did not know Bilbo , of course , as well as I know you ; I was too young , and Bilbo was also more careful – but Bilbo was not careful enough . If you want to know how I first found out , I will tell you . ’ 
  ‘ Go on ! ’ said Frodo faintly . 
  ‘ It was the Sackville - Bagginses that were Bilbo downfall , as you might expect . One day , a year before the Party , I happened to be walking along the road , when I saw Bilbo ahead . Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared , coming towards us . Bilbo slowed down , and then hey presto ! Bilbo vanished . I was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary fashion ; but I got through the hedge and walked along the field inside . I was peeping through into the road , after the S.-B.s had passed , and was looking straight at Bilbo when Bilbo suddenly reappeared . I caught a glint of gold as Bilbo put something back in Bilbo trouser - pocket . 
  ‘ After that I kept my eyes open . In fact , I confess that I spied . But you must admit that that was very intriguing , and I was only in my teens . I must be the only one in the Shire , besides you Frodo , that has ever seen the old fellow ’s secret book . ’ 
  ‘ You have read Frodo book ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ Good heavens above ! Is nothing safe ? ’ 
  ‘ Not too safe , I should say , ’ said Merry . ‘ But I have only had one rapid glance , and that was difficult to get . Frodo never left the book about . I wonder what became of book . I should like another look . Have you got book , Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ No . book was not at Bag End . Frodo must have taken book away . ’ 
  ‘ Well , as I was saying , ’ Merry proceeded , ‘ I kept my knowledge to myself , till this spring when things got serious . Then we formed our conspiracy ; and as we were serious , too , and meant business , we have not been too scrupulous . You are not a very easy nut to crack , and Gandalf is worse . But if you want to be introduced to our chief investigator , I can produce investigator . ’ 
  ‘ Where is investigator ? ’ said Frodo , looking round , as if Frodo expected a masked and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard . 
  ‘ Step forward , Sam ! ’ said Merry ; and Sam stood up with a face scarlet up to the ears . ‘ Here ’s our collector of information ! And investigator collected a lot , I can tell you , before investigator was finally caught . After which , I may say , investigator seemed to regard investigator as on parole , and dried up . ’ 
  ‘ Sam ! ’ cried Frodo , feeling that amazement could go no further , and quite unable to decide whether Frodo felt angry , amused , relieved , or merely foolish . 
  ‘ Yes , sir ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Begging your pardon , sir ! But I meant no wrong to you , Mr. Frodo , nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter . Gandalf has some sense , mind you ; and when you said go alone , Gandalf said no ! take someone as you can trust . ’ 
  ‘ But it does not seem that I can trust anyone , ’ said Frodo . 
  Sam looked at Frodo unhappily . ‘ anyone all depends on what you want , ’ put in Merry . ‘ You can trust us to stick to you through thick and thin – to the bitter end . And you can trust us to keep any secret of yours – closer than you keep secret yourself . But you can not trust us to let you face trouble alone , and go off without a word . We are your friends , Frodo . Anyway : there Frodo is . We know most of what Gandalf has told you . We know a good deal about the Ring . We are horribly afraid – but we are coming with you ; or following you like hounds . ’ 
  ‘ And after all , sir , ’ added Sam , ‘ you did ought to take the Elves ’ advice . Gildor said you should take Gildor as was willing , and you ca n’t deny advice . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t deny deal , ’ said Frodo , looking at Sam , who was now grinning . ‘ I do n’t deny deal , but I ’ll never believe you are sleeping again , whether you snore or not . I shall kick you hard to make sure . 
  ‘ You are a set of deceitful scoundrels ! ’ Sam said , turning to the others . ‘ But bless you ! ’ Sam laughed , getting up and waving Sam arms , ‘ I give in . I will take Gildor ’s advice . If the danger were not so dark , I should dance for joy . Even so , I can not help feeling happy ; happier than I have felt for a long time . I had dreaded this evening . ’ 
  ‘ Good ! That ’s settled . Three cheers for Captain Frodo and company ! ’ cheers shouted ; and cheers danced round Frodo . Merry and Pippin began a song , which cheers had apparently got ready for the occasion . 
  song was made on the model of the dwarf - song that started Bilbo on Bilbo adventure long ago , and went to the same tune : 
  Farewell we call to hearth and hall ! 
  Though wind may blow and rain may fall , 
  We must away ere break of day 
  Far over wood and mountain tall . 
  To Rivendell , where Elves yet dwell 
  In glades beneath the misty fell , 
  Through moor and waste we ride in haste , 
  And whither then we can not tell . 
  With foes ahead , behind us dread , 
  Beneath the sky shall be our bed , 
  Until at last our toil be passed , 
  Our journey done , our errand sped . 
  We must away ! We must away ! 
  We ride before the break of day ! 
  ‘ Very good ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ But in that case there are a lot of things to do before we go to bed – under a roof , for tonight at any rate . ’ 
  ‘ Oh ! That was poetry ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Do you really mean to start before the break of day ? ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ I fear those Black Riders , and I am sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long , especially in a place to which it is known I was going . Also Gildor advised me not to wait . But I should very much like to see Gandalf . I could see that even Gildor was disturbed when Gildor heard that Gandalf had never appeared . place really depends on two things . How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury ? And how soon could we get off ? Bucklebury will take a good deal of preparation . ’ 
  ‘ The answer to the second question , ’ said Merry , ‘ is that we could get off in an hour . I have prepared practically everything . There are five ponies in a stable across the fields ; stores and tackle are all packed , except for a few extra clothes , and the perishable food . ’ 
  ‘ It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But what about the Black Riders ? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf ? ’ 
  ‘ That all depends on what you think the Riders would do , if Riders found you here , ’ answered Merry . ‘ Riders could have reached here by now , of course , if Riders were not stopped at the North - gate , where the Hedge runs down to the river - bank , just this side of the Bridge . The gate - guards would not let Riders through by night , though Riders might break through . Even in the daylight Riders would try to keep guards out , I think , at any rate until Riders got a message through to the Master of the Hall – for Riders would not like the look of the Riders , and would certainly be frightened by guards . But , of course , Buckland can not resist a determined attack for long . And it is possible that in the morning even a Black Rider that rode up and asked for Mr. Baggins would be let through . It is pretty generally known that you are coming back to live at Crickhollow . ’ 
  Frodo sat for a while in thought . ‘ I have made up my mind , ’ Frodo said finally . ‘ I am starting tomorrow , as soon as mind is light . But I am not going by road : it would be safer to wait here than that . If I go through the North - gate my departure from Buckland will be known at once , instead of being secret for several days at least , as departure might be . And what is more , the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will certainly be watched , whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not . We do n’t know how many there are ; but there are at least two , and possibly more . The only thing to do is to go off in a quite unexpected direction . ’ 
  ‘ But that can only mean going into the Old Forest ! ’ said Fredegar horrified . ‘ You ca n’t be thinking of doing that . that is quite as dangerous as Black Riders . ’ 
  ‘ Not quite , ’ said Merry . ‘ that sounds very desperate , but I believe Frodo is right . that is the only way of getting off without being followed at once . With luck we might get a considerable start . ’ 
  ‘ But you wo n’t have any luck in the Old Forest , ’ objected Fredegar . ‘ No one ever has luck in there . You ’ll get lost . People do n’t go in there . ’ 
  ‘ Oh yes People do ! ’ said Merry . ‘ The Brandybucks go in – occasionally when the fit takes People . We have a private entrance . Frodo went in once , long ago . I have been in several times : usually in daylight , of course , when the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet . ’ 
  ‘ Well , do as you think best ! ’ said Fredegar . ‘ I am more afraid of the Old Forest than of anything I know about : the stories about anything are a nightmare ; but my vote hardly counts , as I am not going on the journey . Still , I am very glad someone is stopping behind , who can tell Gandalf what you have done , when someone turns up , as I am sure someone will before long . ’ 
  Fond as Bolger was of Frodo , Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire , nor to see what lay outside Shire . Bolger family came from the Eastfarthing , from Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact , but Bolger had never been over the Brandywine Bridge . Bolger task , according to the original plans of the conspirators , was to stay behind and deal with inquisitive folk , and to keep up as long as possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins was still living at Crickhollow . Baggins had even brought along some old clothes of Frodo ’s to help Bolger in playing the part . clothes little thought how dangerous that part might prove . 
  ‘ Excellent ! ’ said Frodo , when Bolger understood the plan . ‘ We could not have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise . I do n’t know whether these Riders can read or not , of course , but I should not have dared to risk a written message , in case Riders got in and searched the house . But if Fatty is willing to hold the fort , and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we have gone , that decides me . I am going into the Old Forest first thing tomorrow . ’ 
  ‘ Well , that ’s that , ’ said Pippin . ‘ On the whole I would rather have our job than Fatty ’s – waiting here till Black Riders come . ’ 
  ‘ You wait till you are well inside the Forest , ’ said Fredegar . ‘ You ’ll wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow . ’ 
  ‘ time ’s no good arguing about Fatty any more , ’ said Merry . ‘ We have still got to tidy up and put the finishing touches to the packing , before we get to bed . I shall call you all before the break of day . ’ 
  When at last Frodo had got to bed , Frodo could not sleep for some time . Frodo legs ached . Frodo was glad that Frodo was riding in the morning . Eventually Frodo fell into a vague dream , in which Frodo seemed to be looking out of a high window over a dark sea of tangled trees . Down below among the roots there was the sound of creatures crawling and snuffling . Frodo felt sure creatures would smell Frodo out sooner or later . 
  Then Frodo heard a noise in the distance . At first Frodo thought noise was a great wind coming over the leaves of the forest . Then Frodo knew that noise was not leaves , but the sound of the Sea far - off ; a sound Frodo had never heard in waking life , though noise had often troubled Frodo dreams . Suddenly Frodo found Frodo was out in the open . There were no trees after all . Frodo was on a dark heath , and there was a strange salt smell in the air . Looking up Frodo saw before Frodo a tall white tower , standing alone on a high ridge . A great desire came over Frodo to climb the tower and see the Sea . Frodo started to struggle up the ridge towards the tower : but suddenly a light came in the sky , and there was a noise of thunder . 
  Chapter 6 
  THE OLD FOREST 
  Frodo woke suddenly . Chapter was still dark in the room . Merry was standing there with a candle in one hand , and banging on the door with the other . ‘ All right ! What is Chapter ? ’ said Frodo , still shaken and bewildered . 
  ‘ What is Chapter ! ’ cried Merry . ‘ It is time to get up . Chapter is half past four and very foggy . Come on ! Sam is already getting breakfast ready . Even Pippin is up . I am just going to saddle the ponies , and fetch the one that is to be the baggage - carrier . Wake that sluggard Fatty ! At least sluggard must get up and see us off . ’ 
  Soon after six o’clock the five hobbits were ready to start . Fatty Bolger was still yawning . hobbits stole quietly out of the house . Merry went in front leading a laden pony , and took Bolger way along a path that went through a spinney behind the house , and then cut across several fields . The leaves of trees were glistening , and every twig was dripping ; the grass was grey with cold dew . Everything was still , and far - away noises seemed near and clear : fowls chattering in a yard , someone closing a door of a distant house . 
  In fowls shed fowls found the ponies : sturdy little beasts of the kind loved by hobbits , not speedy , but good for a long day ’s work . fowls mounted , and soon fowls were riding off into the mist , which seemed to open reluctantly before fowls and close forbiddingly behind fowls . After riding for about an hour , slowly and without talking , fowls saw the Hedge looming suddenly ahead . Hedge was tall and netted over with silver cobwebs . 
  ‘ How are you going to get through this ? ’ asked Fredegar . 
  ‘ Follow me ! ’ said Merry , ‘ and you will see . ’ Fredegar turned to the left along the Hedge , and soon fowls came to a point where left bent inwards , running along the lip of a hollow . A cutting had been made , at some distance from the Hedge , and went sloping gently down into the ground . cutting had walls of brick at the sides , which rose steadily , until suddenly walls arched over and formed a tunnel that dived deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side . 
  Here Fatty Bolger halted . ‘ Good - bye , Frodo ! ’ Bolger said . ‘ I wish you were not going into the Forest . I only hope you will not need rescuing before the day is out . But good luck to you – today and every day ! ’ 
  ‘ If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest , I shall be lucky , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road : we shall soon be back on Gandalf and going as fast as we can . ’ ‘ Good - bye ! ’ Road cried , and rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar ’s sight into the tunnel . 
  Fredegar was dark and damp . At the far end Fredegar was closed by a gate of thick - set iron bars . Merry got down and unlocked the gate , and when bars had all passed through Merry pushed gate to again . gate shut with a clang , and the lock clicked . The sound was ominous . 
  ‘ There ! ’ said Merry . ‘ You have left the Shire , and are now outside , and on the edge of the Old Forest . ’ 
  ‘ Are the stories about Shire true ? ’ asked Pippin . 
  ‘ I do n’t know what stories you mean , ’ Merry answered . ‘ If you mean the old bogey - stories Fatty ’s nurses used to tell Forest , about goblins and wolves and things of that sort , I should say no . At any rate I do n’t believe nurses . But the Forest is queer . Everything in rate is very much more alive , more aware of what is going on , so to speak , than things are in the Shire . And the trees do not like strangers . trees watch you . trees are usually content merely to watch you , as long as daylight lasts , and do n’t do much . Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a branch , or stick a root out , or grasp at you with a long trailer . But at night things can be most alarming , or so I am told . I have only once or twice been in here after dark , and then only near the hedge . I thought all the trees were whispering to each other , passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language ; and the branches swayed and groped without any wind . branches do say the trees do actually move , and can surround strangers and hem strangers in . In fact long ago strangers attacked the Hedge : strangers came and planted strangers right by Hedge , and leaned over Hedge . But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees , and made a great bonfire in the Forest , and burned all the ground in a long strip east of the Hedge . After that the trees gave up the attack , but trees became very unfriendly . There is still a wide bare space not far inside where the bonfire was made . ’ 
  ‘ Is it only the trees that are dangerous ? ’ asked Pippin . 
  ‘ There are various queer things living deep in the Forest , and on the far side , ’ said Merry , ‘ or at least I have heard so ; but I have never seen any of things . But something makes paths . Whenever one comes inside one finds open tracks ; but tracks seem to shift and change from time to time in a queer fashion . Not far from this tunnel there is , or was for a long time , the beginning of quite a broad path leading to the Bonfire Glade , and then on more or less in our direction , east and a little north . That is the path I am going to try and find . ’ 
  The hobbits now left the tunnel - gate and rode across the wide hollow . On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest , a hundred yards and more beyond the Hedge ; but Hedge vanished as soon as Hedge brought hobbits under the trees . Looking back hobbits could see the dark line of the Hedge through the stems of trees that were already thick about hobbits . Looking ahead hobbits could see only tree - trunks of innumerable sizes and shapes : straight or bent , twisted , leaning , squat or slender , smooth or gnarled and branched ; and all the stems were green or grey with moss and slimy , shaggy growths . 
  Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful . ‘ You had better lead on and find that path , ’ Frodo said to Forest . ‘ Do n’t let us lose one another , or forget which way the Hedge lies ! ’ 
  hobbits picked a way among the trees , and hobbits ponies plodded along , carefully avoiding the many writhing and interlacing roots . There was no undergrowth . The ground was rising steadily , and as trees went forward it seemed that the trees became taller , darker , and thicker . There was no sound , except an occasional drip of moisture falling through the still leaves . For the moment there was no whispering or movement among the branches ; but branches all got an uncomfortable feeling that branches were being watched with disapproval , deepening to dislike and even enmity . The feeling steadily grew , until branches found branches looking up quickly , or glancing back over branches shoulders , as if branches expected a sudden blow . 
  There was not as yet any sign of a path , and the trees seemed constantly to bar trees way . Pippin suddenly felt that Pippin could not bear way any longer , and without warning let out a shout . ‘ Oi ! Oi ! ’ Pippin cried . ‘ I am not going to do anything . Just let me pass through , will you ! ’ 
  The others halted startled ; but the cry fell as if muffled by a heavy curtain . There was no echo or answer though the wood seemed to become more crowded and more watchful than before . 
  ‘ I should not shout , if I were you , ’ said Merry . ‘ anything does more harm than good . ’ 
  Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through , and if Frodo had been right to make the others come into this abominable wood . Merry was looking from side to side , and seemed already uncertain which way to go . Pippin noticed Merry . ‘ anything has not taken you long to lose us , ’ Pippin said . But at that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead . 
  ‘ Well , well ! ’ Pippin said . ‘ These trees do shift . There is the Bonfire Glade in front of us ( or I hope so ) , but the path to Glade seems to have moved away ! ’ 
  The light grew clearer as light went forward . Suddenly light came out of the trees and found light in a wide circular space . There was sky above light , blue and clear to light surprise , for down under the Forest - roof light had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist . The sun was not , however , high enough yet to shine down into the clearing , though sun light was on the tree - tops . The leaves were all thicker and greener about the edges of the glade , enclosing glade with an almost solid wall . No tree grew there , only rough grass and many tall plants : stalky and faded hemlocks and wood - parsley , fire - weed seeding into fluffy ashes , and rampant nettles and thistles . A dreary place : but it seemed a charming and cheerful garden after the close Forest . 
  The hobbits felt encouraged , and looked up hopefully at the broadening daylight in the sky . At the far side of the glade there was a break in the wall of trees , and a clear path beyond break . trees could see break running on into the wood , wide in places and open above , though every now and again the trees drew in and overshadowed break with trees dark boughs . Up this path trees rode . trees were still climbing gently , but trees now went much quicker , and with better heart ; for it seemed to trees that the Forest had relented , and was going to let trees pass unhindered after all . 
  But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy . The trees drew close again on either side , and trees could no longer see far ahead . Now stronger than ever trees felt again the ill will of the wood pressing on trees . So silent was it that the fall of trees ponies ’ hoofs , rustling on dead leaves and occasionally stumbling on hidden roots , seemed to thud in trees ears . Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage trees , but Frodo voice sank to a murmur . 
  O ! Wanderers in the shadowed land 
  despair not ! For though dark Wanderers stand , 
  all woods there be must end at last , 
  and see the open sun go past : 
  the setting sun , the rising sun , 
  the day ’s end , or the day begun . 
  For east or west all woods must fail … 
  Fail – even as Frodo said the word Frodo voice faded into silence . The air seemed heavy and the making of words wearisome . Just behind words a large branch fell from an old overhanging tree with a crash into the path . The trees seemed to close in before words . 
  ‘ words do not like all that about ending and failing , ’ said Merry . ‘ I should not sing any more at present . Wait till we do get to the edge , and then we ’ll turn and give words a rousing chorus ! ’ 
  Merry spoke cheerfully , and if Merry felt any great anxiety , Merry did not show anxiety . The others did not answer . others were depressed . A heavy weight was settling steadily on Frodo ’s heart , and Frodo regretted now with every step forward that Frodo had ever thought of challenging the menace of the trees . Frodo was , indeed , just about to stop and propose going back ( if that was still possible ) , when things took a new turn . The path stopped climbing , and became for a while nearly level . The dark trees drew aside , and ahead trees could see the path going almost straight forward . Before trees , but some distance off , there stood a green hill - top , treeless , rising like a bald head out of the encircling wood . The path seemed to be making directly for wood . 
  trees now hurried forward again , delighted with the thought of climbing out for a while above the roof of the Forest . The path dipped , and then again began to climb upwards , leading trees at last to the foot of the steep hillside . There path left the trees and faded into the turf . The wood stood all round the hill like thick hair that ended sharply in a circle round a shaven crown . 
  The hobbits led hobbits ponies up , winding round and round until hobbits reached the top . There hobbits stood and gazed about ponies . The air was gleaming and sunlit , but hazy ; and ponies could not see to any great distance . Near at hand the mist was now almost gone ; though here and there mist lay in hollows of the wood , and to the south of ponies , out of a deep fold cutting right across the Forest , the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke . 
  ‘ That , ’ said Merry , pointing with Merry hand , ‘ that is the line of the Withywindle . that comes down out of the Downs and flows south - west through the midst of the Forest to join the Brandywine below Haysend . We do n’t want to go that way ! The Withywindle valley is said to be the queerest part of the whole wood – the centre from which all the queerness comes , as valley were . ’ 
  The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out , but others could see little but mists over the damp and deep - cut valley ; and beyond valley the southern half of the Forest faded from view . 
  The sun on the hill - top was now getting hot . sun must have been about eleven o’clock ; but the autumn haze still prevented others from seeing much in other directions . In the west others could not make out either the line of the Hedge or the valley of the Brandywine beyond sun . Northward , where others looked most hopefully , others could see nothing that might be the line of the great East Road , for which others were making . others were on an island in a sea of trees , and the horizon was veiled . 
  On the south - eastern side the ground fell very steeply , as if the slopes of the hill were continued far down under the trees , like island - shores that really are the sides of a mountain rising out of deep waters . slopes sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below shores , while shores ate shores mid - day meal . As the sun rose and passed noon shores glimpsed far off in the east the grey - green lines of the Downs that lay beyond the Old Forest on that side . That cheered shores greatly ; for it was good to see a sight of anything beyond the wood ’s borders , though shores did not mean to go that way , if shores could help reputation : the Barrow - downs had as sinister a reputation in hobbit - legend as the Forest reputation . 
  At length shores made up shores minds to go on again . The path that had brought shores to the hill reappeared on the northward side ; but shores had not followed path far before shores became aware that path was bending steadily to the right . Soon path began to descend rapidly and shores guessed that path must actually be heading towards the Withywindle valley : not at all the direction shores wished to take . After some discussion shores decided to leave this misleading path and strike northward ; for although shores had not been able to see Road from the hill - top , the Road must lie that way , and Road could not be many miles off . Also northward , and to the left of the path , the land seemed to be drier and more open , climbing up to slopes where the trees were thinner , and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes and other strange and nameless trees of the denser wood . 
  At first oaks choice seemed to be good : oaks got along at a fair speed , though whenever oaks got a glimpse of the sun in an open glade oaks seemed unaccountably to have veered eastwards . But after a time the trees began to close in again , just where trees had appeared from a distance to be thinner and less tangled . Then deep folds in the ground were discovered unexpectedly , like the ruts of great giant - wheels or wide moats and sunken roads long disused and choked with brambles . These lay usually right across These line of march , and could only be crossed by scrambling down and out again , which was troublesome and difficult with These ponies . Each time These climbed down These found the hollow filled with thick bushes and matted undergrowth , which somehow would not yield to the left , but only gave way when These turned to the right ; and These had to go some distance along the bottom before These could find a way up the further bank . Each time These clambered out , the trees seemed deeper and darker ; and always to the left and upwards it was most difficult to find a way , and trees were forced to the right and downwards . 
  After an hour or two trees had lost all clear sense of direction , though trees knew well enough that trees had long ceased to go northward at all . trees were being headed off , and were simply following a course chosen for These – eastwards and southwards , into the heart of the Forest and not out of course . 
  The afternoon was wearing away when These scrambled and stumbled into a fold that was wider and deeper than any These had yet met . fold was so steep and overhung that afternoon proved impossible to climb out of any again , either forwards or backwards , without leaving These ponies and These baggage behind . All These could do was to follow the fold – downwards . The ground grew soft , and in places boggy ; springs appeared in the banks , and soon springs found springs following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy bed . Then the ground began to fall rapidly , and the brook growing strong and noisy , flowed and leaped swiftly downhill . springs were in a deep dim - lit gully over - arched by trees high above springs . 
  After stumbling along for some way along the stream , springs came quite suddenly out of the gloom . As if through a gate springs saw the sunlight before trees . Coming to the opening trees found that trees had made trees way down through a cleft in a high steep bank , almost a cliff . At bank feet was a wide space of grass and reeds ; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank almost as steep . A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy upon the hidden land between . In the midst of land there wound lazily a dark river of brown water , bordered with ancient willows , arched over with willows , blocked with fallen willows , and flecked with thousands of faded willow - leaves . The air was thick with willows , fluttering yellow from the branches ; for there was a warm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the valley , and the reeds were rustling , and the willow - boughs were creaking . 
  ‘ Well , now I have at least some notion of where we are ! ’ said Merry . ‘ We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended . This is the River Withywindle ! I will go on and explore . ’ 
  Withywindle passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the long grasses . After a while Merry reappeared , and reported that there was fairly solid ground between the cliff - foot and the river ; in some places firm turf went down to the water ’s edge . ‘ What ’s more , ’ foot said , ‘ there seems to be something like a footpath winding along on this side of the river . If we turn left and follow river , we shall be bound to come out on the east side of the Forest eventually . ’ 
  ‘ I dare say ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ That is , if the track goes on so far , and does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there . Who made the track , do you suppose , and why ? I am sure track was not for our benefit . I am getting very suspicious of this Forest and everything in track , and I begin to believe all the stories about track . And have you any idea how far eastward we should have to go ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Merry , ‘ I have n’t . I do n’t know in the least how far down the Withywindle we are , or who could possibly come here often enough to make a path along Withywindle . But there is no other way out that I can see or think of . ’ 
  There being nothing else for Withywindle , Merry filed out , and Merry led stories to the path that Forest had discovered . Everywhere the reeds and grasses were lush and tall , in places far above reeds heads ; but once found , the path was easy to follow , as path turned and twisted , picking out the sounder ground among the bogs and pools . Here and there path passed over other rills , running down gullies into the Withywindle out of the higher forest - lands , and at these points there were tree - trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across . 
  The hobbits began to feel very hot . There were armies of flies of all kinds buzzing round armies ears , and the afternoon sun was burning on armies backs . At last armies came suddenly into a thin shade ; great grey branches reached across the path . Each step forward became more reluctant than the last . Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up armies legs , and falling softly out of the air upon armies heads and eyes . 
  Frodo felt Frodo chin go down and Sleepiness head nod . Just in front of sun Pippin fell forward on to Pippin knees . Frodo halted . ‘ front ’s no good , ’ Pippin heard Merry saying . ‘ Ca n’t go another step without rest . Must have nap . front ’s cool under the willows . Less flies ! ’ 
  Frodo did not like the sound of this . ‘ Come on ! ’ Frodo cried . ‘ We ca n’t have a nap yet . We must get clear of the Forest first . ’ But the others were too far gone to care . Beside others Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly . 
  Suddenly Frodo Frodo felt sleep overwhelming Sam . Sam head swam . There now seemed hardly a sound in the air . The flies had stopped buzzing . Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing , a soft fluttering as of a song half whispered , seemed to stir in the boughs above . Sam lifted Sam heavy eyes and saw leaning over head a huge willow - tree , old and hoary . Enormous tree looked , tree sprawling branches going up like reaching arms with many long - fingered hands , tree knotted and twisted trunk gaping in wide fissures that creaked faintly as the boughs moved . The leaves fluttering against the bright sky dazzled head , and head toppled over , lying where head fell upon the grass . 
  Merry and Pippin dragged Merry forward and lay down with Merry backs to the willow - trunk . Behind Merry the great cracks gaped wide to receive Merry as the tree swayed and creaked . Merry looked up at the grey and yellow leaves , moving softly against the light , and singing . Merry shut Merry eyes , and then it seemed that Merry could almost hear words , cool words , saying something about water and sleep . Merry gave Merry up to the spell and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow . 
  Frodo lay for a while fighting with the sleep that was overpowering grey ; then with an effort grey struggled to grey feet again . grey felt a compelling desire for cool water . ‘ Wait for me , Sam , ’ grey stammered . ‘ Must bathe feet a minute . ’ 
  Half in a dream grey wandered forward to the riverward side of the tree , where great winding roots grew out into the stream , like gnarled dragonets straining down to drink . grey straddled one of these , and paddled grey hot feet in the cool brown water ; and there grey too suddenly fell asleep with grey back against the tree . 
  Sam sat down and scratched Sam head , and yawned like a cavern . Sam was worried . The afternoon was getting late , and Sam thought this sudden sleepiness uncanny . ‘ There ’s more behind this than sun and warm air , ’ Sam muttered to Sam . ‘ I do n’t like this great big tree . I do n’t trust tree . Hark at tree singing about sleep now ! This wo n’t do at all ! ’ 
  Sam pulled Sam to Sam feet , and staggered off to see what had become of the ponies . Sam found that two had wandered on a good way along the path ; and Sam had just caught two and brought two back towards the others , when Sam heard two noises ; one loud , and the other soft but very clear . One was the splash of something heavy falling into the water ; the other was a noise like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast . 
  Sam rushed back to the bank . Frodo was in the water close to the edge , and a great tree - root seemed to be over Frodo and holding Frodo down , but Frodo was not struggling . Sam gripped Frodo by the jacket , and dragged Frodo from under the root ; and then with difficulty hauled Frodo on to the bank . Almost at once Frodo woke , and coughed and spluttered . 
  ‘ Do you know , Sam , ’ Frodo said at length , ‘ the beastly tree threw me in ! I felt tree . The big root just twisted round and tipped me in ! ’ 
  ‘ You were dreaming I expect , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . ‘ You should n’t sit in such a place , if you feel sleepy . ’ 
  ‘ What about the others ? ’ Frodo asked . ‘ I wonder what sort of dreams others are having . ’ 
  others went round to the other side of the tree , and then Sam understood the click that Sam had heard . Pippin had vanished . The crack by which Sam had laid Sam had closed together , so that not a chink could be seen . Merry was trapped : another crack had closed about Sam waist ; Sam legs lay outside , but the rest of Sam was inside a dark opening , the edges of which gripped like a pair of pincers . 
  Frodo and Sam beat first upon the tree - trunk where Pippin had lain . Sam then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held poor Merry . crack was quite useless . 
  ‘ What a foul thing to happen ! ’ cried Frodo wildly . ‘ Why did we ever come into this dreadful Forest ? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow ! ’ Frodo kicked the tree with all Frodo strength , heedless of Frodo own feet . A hardly perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches ; the leaves rustled and whispered , but with a sound now of faint and far - off laughter . 
  ‘ I suppose we have n’t got an axe among our luggage , Mr. Frodo ? ’ asked Sam . 
  ‘ I brought a little hatchet for chopping firewood , ’ said Frodo . ‘ That would n’t be much use . ’ 
  ‘ Wait a minute ! ’ cried Sam , struck by an idea suggested by firewood . ‘ We might do something with fire ! ’ 
  ‘ We might , ’ said Frodo doubtfully . ‘ We might succeed in roasting Pippin alive inside . ’ 
  ‘ We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with , ’ said Sam fiercely . ‘ If tree do n’t let Sam go , I ’ll have tree down , if I have to gnaw tree . ’ Frodo ran to the ponies and before long came back with two tinder - boxes and a hatchet . 
  Quickly ponies gathered dry grass and leaves , and bits of bark ; and made a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks . These ponies heaped against the trunk on the far side of the tree from the prisoners . As soon as Sam had struck a spark into the tinder , spark kindled the dry grass and a flurry of flame and smoke went up . The twigs crackled . Little fingers of fire licked against the dry scored rind of the ancient tree and scorched fire . A tremor ran through the whole willow . The leaves seemed to hiss above leaves heads with a sound of pain and anger . A loud scream came from Merry , and from far inside the tree leaves heard Pippin give a muffled yell . 
  ‘ Put yell out ! Put yell out ! ’ cried Merry . ‘ Merry ’ll squeeze me in two , if you do n’t . Merry says so ! ’ 
  ‘ Who ? What ? ’ shouted Frodo , rushing round to the other side of the tree . 
  ‘ Put yell out ! Put yell out ! ’ begged Merry . The branches of the willow began to sway violently . There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading outwards to the branches of all the other trees round about , as though branches had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the river - valley and set up ripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest . Sam kicked at the little fire and stamped out the sparks . But Frodo , without any clear idea of why Frodo did so , or what Frodo hoped for , ran along the path crying help ! help ! help ! It seemed to Frodo that Frodo could hardly hear the sound of Frodo own shrill voice : it was blown away from Frodo by the willow - wind and drowned in a clamour of leaves , as soon as the words left Frodo mouth . Frodo felt desperate : lost and witless . 
  Suddenly Frodo stopped . There was an answer , or so Frodo thought ; but it seemed to come from behind Frodo , away down the path further back in the Forest . Frodo turned round and listened , and soon there could be no doubt : someone was singing a song ; a deep glad voice was singing carelessly and happily , but voice was singing nonsense : 
  Hey dol ! merry dol ! ring a dong dillo ! 
  Ring a dong ! hop along ! fal lal the willow ! 
  Tom Bom , jolly Tom , Tom Bombadillo ! 
  Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger , Frodo and Sam now both stood still . Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense - words ( or so Frodo seemed ) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song : 
  Hey ! Come merry dol ! derry dol ! My darling ! 
  Light goes the weather - wind and the feathered starling . 
  Down along under Hill , shining in the sunlight , 
  Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight , 
  There my pretty lady is , River - woman ’s daughter , 
  Slender as the willow - wand , clearer than the water . 
  Old Tom Bombadil water - lilies bringing 
  Comes hopping home again . Can you hear starling singing ? 
  Hey ! Come merry dol ! derry dol ! and merry - o , 
  Goldberry , Goldberry , merry yellow berry - o ! 
  Poor old Willow - man , you tuck your roots away ! 
  Tom ’s in a hurry now . Evening will follow day . 
  Tom ’s going home again water - lilies bringing . 
  Hey ! Come derry dol ! Can you hear me singing ? 
  Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted . The wind puffed out . The leaves hung silently again on stiff branches . There was another burst of song , and then suddenly , hopping and dancing along the path , there appeared above the reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in the band . With another hop and a bound there came into view a man , or so it seemed . At any rate man was too large and heavy for a hobbit , if not quite tall enough for one of the Big People , though man made noise enough for one , stumping along with great yellow boots on man thick legs , and charging through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink . man had a blue coat and a long brown beard ; man eyes were blue and bright , and man face was red as a ripe apple , but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter . In man hands man carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white water - lilies . 
  ‘ Help ! ’ cried Frodo and Sam running towards man with Frodo hands stretched out . 
  ‘ Whoa ! Whoa ! steady there ! ’ cried the old Sam , holding up one hand , and Frodo stopped short , as if Frodo had been struck stiff . ‘ Now , my little fellows , where be you a - going to , puffing like a bellows ? What ’s the matter here then ? Do you know who I am ? I ’ m Tom Bombadil . Tell me what ’s your trouble ! Tom ’s in a hurry now . Do n’t you crush my lilies ! ’ 
  ‘ My friends are caught in the willow - tree , ’ cried Frodo breathlessly . 
  ‘ Master Merry ’s being squeezed in a crack ! ’ cried Sam . 
  ‘ What ? ’ shouted Tom Bombadil , leaping up in the air . ‘ Old Man Willow ? Naught worse than that , eh ? That can soon be mended . I know the tune for Merry . Old grey Willow - man ! I ’ll freeze Merry marrow cold , if Merry do n’t behave Merry . I ’ll sing Merry roots off . I ’ll sing a wind up and blow leaf and branch away . Old Man Willow ! ’ 
  Setting down Willow lilies carefully on the grass , Merry ran to the tree . There Merry saw Merry ’s feet still sticking out – the rest had already been drawn further inside . Tom put Tom mouth to the crack and began singing into crack in a low voice . mouth could not catch the words , but evidently Merry was aroused . Tom legs began to kick . Tom sprang away , and breaking off a hanging branch smote the side of the willow with branch . ‘ You let mouth out again , Old Man Willow ! ’ Tom said . ‘ What be you a - thinking of ? You should not be waking . Eat earth ! Dig deep ! Drink water ! Go to sleep ! Bombadil is talking ! ’ Bombadil then seized Merry ’s feet and drew Merry out of the suddenly widening crack . 
  There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open , and out of creak Pippin sprang , as if Pippin had been kicked . Then with a loud snap both cracks closed fast again . A shudder ran through the tree from root to tip , and complete silence fell . 
  ‘ Thank you ! ’ said the hobbits , one after the other . 
  Tom Bombadil burst out laughing . ‘ Well , my little fellows ! ’ said Bombadil , stooping so that Bombadil peered into hobbits faces . ‘ You shall come home with me ! The table is all laden with yellow cream , honeycomb , and white bread and butter . Goldberry is waiting . Time enough for questions around the supper table . You follow after me as quick as you are able ! ’ With that Goldberry picked up Goldberry lilies , and then with a beckoning wave of Goldberry hand went hopping and dancing along the path eastward , still singing loudly and nonsensically . 
  Too surprised and too relieved to talk , the hobbits followed after Goldberry as fast as hobbits could . But that was not fast enough . Tom soon disappeared in front of hobbits , and the noise of Tom singing got fainter and further away . Suddenly Tom voice came floating back to hobbits in a loud halloo ! 
  Hop along , my little friends , up the Withywindle ! 
  Tom ’s going on ahead candles for to kindle . 
  Down west sinks the Sun : soon you will be groping . 
  When the night - shadows fall , then the door will open , 
  Out of the window - panes light will twinkle yellow . 
  Fear no alder black ! Heed no hoary willow ! 
  Fear neither root nor bough ! Tom goes on before you . 
  Hey now ! merry dol ! We ’ll be waiting for you ! 
  After that the hobbits heard no more . Almost at once the sun seemed to sink into the trees behind hobbits . hobbits thought of the slanting light of evening glittering on the Brandywine River , and the windows of Bucklebury beginning to gleam with hundreds of lights . Great shadows fell across hobbits ; trunks and branches of trees hung dark and threatening over the path . White mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the roots of the trees upon river borders . Out of the very ground at borders feet a shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk . 
  steam became difficult to follow the path , and borders were very tired . borders legs seemed leaden . Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on either side of borders ; and if borders looked up to the pale sky , borders caught sight of queer gnarled and knobbly faces that gloomed dark against the twilight , and leered down at faces from the high bank and the edges of the wood . faces began to feel that all this country was unreal , and that faces were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening . 
  Just as faces felt faces feet slowing down to a standstill , faces noticed that the ground was gently rising . The water began to murmur . In the darkness faces caught the white glimmer of foam , where the river flowed over a short fall . Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left behind . trees stepped out from the Forest , and found a wide sweep of grass welling up before trees . The river , now small and swift , was leaping merrily down to meet trees , glinting here and there in the light of the stars , which were already shining in the sky . 
  The grass under grass feet was smooth and short , as if river had been mown or shaven . The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped , and trim as a hedge . The path was now plain before eaves , well - tended and bordered with stone . path wound up on to the top of a grassy knoll , now grey under the pale starry night ; and there , still high above eaves on a further slope , eaves saw the twinkling lights of a house . Down again the path went , and then up again , up a long smooth hillside of turf , towards the light . Suddenly a wide yellow beam flowed out brightly from a door that was opened . There was Tom Bombadil ’s house before eaves , up , down , under hill . Behind house a steep shoulder of the land lay grey and bare , and beyond that the dark shapes of the Barrow - downs stalked away into the eastern night . 
  shapes all hurried forward , hobbits and ponies . Already half shapes weariness and all shapes fears had fallen from shapes . Hey ! Come merry dol ! rolled out the song to greet shapes . 
  Hey ! Come derry dol ! Hop along , my hearties ! 
  Hobbits ! Ponies all ! We are fond of parties . 
  Now let the fun begin ! Let us sing together ! 
  Then another clear voice , as young and as ancient as Spring , like the song of a glad water flowing down into the night from a bright morning in the hills , came falling like silver to meet hills : 
  Now let the song begin ! Let us sing together 
  Of sun , stars , moon and mist , rain and cloudy weather , 
  Light on the budding leaf , dew on the feather , 
  Wind on the open hill , bells on the heather , 
  Reeds by the shady pool , lilies on the water : 
  Old Tom Bombadil and the River - daughter ! 
  And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold , and a golden light was all about hobbits . 
  Chapter 7 
  IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL 
  The four hobbits stepped over the wide stone threshold , and stood still , blinking . hobbits were in a long low room , filled with the light of lamps swinging from the beams of the roof ; and on the table of dark polished wood stood many candles , tall and yellow , burning brightly . 
  In a chair , at the far side of the room facing the outer door , sat a woman . daughter long yellow hair rippled down daughter shoulders ; daughter gown was green , green as young reeds , shot with silver like beads of dew ; and daughter belt was of gold , shaped like a chain of flag - lilies set with the pale - blue eyes of forget - me - nots . About daughter feet in wide vessels of green and brown earthenware , white water - lilies were floating , so that daughter seemed to be enthroned in the midst of a pool . 
  ‘ Enter , good guests ! ’ daughter said , and as daughter spoke lilies knew that it was daughter clear voice lilies had heard singing . lilies came a few timid steps further into the room , and began to bow low , feeling strangely surprised and awkward , like folk that , knocking at a cottage door to beg for a drink of water , have been answered by a fair young elf - queen clad in living flowers . But before lilies could say anything , daughter sprang lightly up and over the lily - bowls , and ran laughing towards lilies ; and as daughter ran daughter gown rustled softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river . 
  ‘ Come dear folk ! ’ daughter said , taking Frodo by the hand . ‘ Laugh and be merry ! I am Goldberry , daughter of the River . ’ Then lightly daughter passed hand and closing the door daughter turned daughter back to door , with daughter white arms spread out across door . ‘ Let us shut out the night ! ’ daughter said . ‘ For you are still afraid , perhaps , of mist and tree - shadows and deep water , and untame things . Fear nothing ! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil . ’ 
  The hobbits looked at daughter in wonder ; and daughter looked at each of hobbits and smiled . ‘ Fair lady Goldberry ! ’ said Frodo at last , feeling Frodo heart moved with a joy that Frodo did not understand . Frodo stood as Frodo had at times stood enchanted by fair elven - voices ; but the spell that was now laid upon Frodo was different : less keen and lofty was the delight , but deeper and nearer to mortal heart ; marvellous and yet not strange . ‘ Fair lady Goldberry ! ’ Frodo said again . ‘ Now the joy that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to me . 
  O slender as a willow - wand ! O clearer than clear water ! 
  O reed by the living pool ! Fair River - daughter ! 
  O spring - time and summer - time , and spring again after ! 
  O wind on the waterfall , and the leaves ’ laughter ! ’ 
  Suddenly River stopped and stammered , overcome with surprise to hear River saying such things . But Goldberry laughed . 
  ‘ Welcome ! ’ Goldberry said . ‘ I had not heard that folk of the Shire were so sweet - tongued . But I see that you are an Elf - friend ; the light in your eyes and the ring in your voice tells folk . This is a merry meeting ! Sit now , and wait for the Master of the house ! friend will not be long . friend is tending your tired beasts . ’ 
  The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush - seated chairs , while Goldberry busied Goldberry about the table ; and hobbits eyes followed Goldberry , for the slender grace of Goldberry movement filled hobbits with quiet delight . From somewhere behind the house came the sound of singing . Every now and again hobbits caught , among many a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding dillo the repeated words : 
  Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow ; 
  Bright blue Bombadil jacket is , and fellow boots are yellow . 
  ‘ Fair lady ! ’ said Frodo again after a while . ‘ Tell me , if my asking does not seem foolish , who is Tom Bombadil ? ’ 
  ‘ friend is , ’ said Goldberry , staying Goldberry swift movements and smiling . 
  Frodo looked at Goldberry questioningly . ‘ friend is , as you have seen friend , ’ Goldberry said in answer to friend look . ‘ friend is the Master of wood , water , and hill . ’ 
  ‘ Then all this strange land belongs to friend ? ’ 
  ‘ No indeed ! ’ Goldberry answered , and Goldberry smile faded . ‘ That would indeed be a burden , ’ Goldberry added in a low voice , as if to Goldberry . ‘ The trees and the grasses and all things growing or living in the land belong each to each . Tom Bombadil is the Master . No one has ever caught old Tom walking in the forest , wading in the water , leaping on the hill - tops under light and shadow . Bombadil has no fear . Tom Bombadil is master . ’ 
  A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil . Bombadil had now no hat and Bombadil thick brown hair was crowned with autumn leaves . Bombadil laughed , and going to Goldberry , took Goldberry hand . 
  ‘ Here ’s my pretty lady ! ’ Bombadil said , bowing to the hobbits . ‘ Here ’s my Goldberry clothed all in silver - green with flowers in Goldberry girdle ! Is the table laden ? I see yellow cream and honeycomb , and white bread , and butter ; milk , cheese , and green herbs and ripe berries gathered . Is that enough for us ? Is the supper ready ? ’ 
  ‘ supper is , ’ said Goldberry ; ‘ but the guests perhaps are not ? ’ 
  Tom clapped Tom hands and cried : ‘ Tom , Tom ! your guests are tired , and you had near forgotten ! Come now , my merry friends , and Tom will refresh you ! You shall clean grimy hands , and wash your weary faces ; cast off your muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles ! ’ 
  Tom opened the door , and hands followed Tom down a short passage and round a sharp turn . hands came to a low room with a sloping roof ( a penthouse , it seemed , built on to the north end of the house ) . penthouse walls were of clean stone , but walls were mostly covered with green hanging mats and yellow curtains . The floor was flagged , and strewn with fresh green rushes . There were four deep mattresses , each piled with white blankets , laid on the floor along one side . Against the opposite wall was a long bench laden with wide earthenware basins , and beside bench stood brown ewers filled with water , some cold , some steaming hot . There were soft green slippers set ready beside each bed . 
  Before long , washed and refreshed , the hobbits were seated at the table , two on each side , while at either end sat Goldberry and the Master . two was a long and merry meal . Though the hobbits ate , as only famished hobbits can eat , there was no lack . The drink in hobbits drinking - bowls seemed to be clear cold water , yet drink went to hobbits hearts like wine and set free hobbits voices . The guests became suddenly aware that guests were singing merrily , as if drink was easier and more natural than talking . 
  At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table swiftly . The guests were commanded to sit quiet , and were set in chairs , each with a footstool to Goldberry tired feet . There was a fire in the wide hearth before chairs , and fire was burning with a sweet smell , as if fire were built of apple - wood . When everything was set in order , all the lights in the room were put out , except one lamp and a pair of candles at each end of the chimney - shelf . Then Goldberry came and stood before candles , holding a candle ; and Goldberry wished candles each a good night and deep sleep . 
  ‘ Have peace now , ’ Goldberry said , ‘ until the morning ! Heed no nightly noises ! For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill - top . Good night ! ’ Goldberry passed out of the room with a glimmer and a rustle . The sound of Goldberry footsteps was like a stream falling gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night . 
  Tom sat on a while beside stones in silence , while each of stones tried to muster the courage to ask one of the many questions Tom had meant to ask at supper . Sleep gathered on stones eyelids . At last Frodo spoke : 
  ‘ Did you hear me calling , Master , or was night just chance that brought you at that moment ? ’ 
  Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream . ‘ Eh , what ? ’ said Tom . ‘ Did I hear you calling ? Nay , I did not hear : I was busy singing . Just chance brought me then , if chance you call chance . It was no plan of mine , though I was waiting for you . We heard news of you , and learned that you were wandering . We guessed you ’d come ere long down to the water : all paths lead that way , down to Withywindle . Old grey Willow - man , Withywindle ’s a mighty singer ; and singer ’s hard for little folk to escape Withywindle cunning mazes . But Tom had an errand there , that Tom dared not hinder . ’ Tom nodded as if sleep was taking Tom again ; but Tom went on in a soft singing voice : 
  I had an errand there : gathering water - lilies , 
  green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady , 
  the last ere the year ’s end to keep snows from the winter , 
  to flower by lady pretty feet till the snows are melted . 
  Each year at summer ’s end I go to find snows for lady , 
  in a wide pool , deep and clear , far down Withywindle ; 
  there snows open first in spring and there snows linger latest . 
  By that pool long ago I found the River - daughter , 
  fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes . 
  Sweet was daughter singing then , and daughter heart was beating ! 
  Goldberry opened Goldberry eyes and looked at eyes with a sudden glint of blue : 
  And that proved well for you – for now I shall no longer 
  go down deep again along the forest - water , 
  not while the year is old . Nor shall I be passing 
  Old Man Willow ’s house this side of spring - time , 
  not till the merry spring , when the River - daughter 
  dances down the withy - path to bathe in the water . 
  Goldberry fell silent again ; but Frodo could not help asking one more question : the one Goldberry most desired to have answered . ‘ Tell us , Master , ’ Goldberry said , ‘ about the Willow - Goldberry . What is Goldberry ? I have never heard of Goldberry before . ’ 
  ‘ No , do n’t ! ’ said Merry and Pippin together , sitting suddenly upright . ‘ Not now ! Not until the morning ! ’ 
  ‘ That is right ! ’ said the old man . ‘ Now is the time for resting . Some things are ill to hear when the world ’s in shadow . Sleep till the morning - light , rest on the pillow ! Heed no nightly noise ! Fear no grey willow ! ’ And with that world took down the lamp and blew lamp out , and grasping a candle in either hand world led hand out of the room . 
  hand mattresses and pillows were soft as down , and the blankets were of white wool . hand had hardly laid hand on the deep beds and drawn the light covers over beds before beds were asleep . 
  In the dead night , Frodo lay in a dream without light . Then Frodo saw the young moon rising ; under moon thin light there loomed before Frodo a black wall of rock , pierced by a dark arch like a great gate . It seemed to Frodo that Frodo was lifted up , and passing over Frodo saw that the rock - wall was a circle of hills , and that within circle was a plain , and in the midst of the plain stood a pinnacle of stone , like a vast tower but not made by hands . On circle top stood the figure of a man . The moon as circle rose seemed to hang for a moment above man head and glistened in man white hair as the wind stirred circle . Up from the dark plain below came the crying of fell voices , and the howling of many wolves . Suddenly a shadow , like the shape of great wings , passed across the moon . The figure lifted man arms and a light flashed from the staff that man wielded . A mighty eagle swept down and bore man away . The voices wailed and the wolves yammered . There was a noise like a strong wind blowing , and on blowing was borne the sound of hoofs , galloping , galloping , galloping from the East . ‘ Black Riders ! ’ thought Frodo as Frodo wakened , with the sound of the hoofs still echoing in Frodo mind . Frodo wondered if Frodo would ever again have the courage to leave the safety of these stone walls . Frodo lay motionless , still listening ; but all was now silent , and at last Frodo turned and fell asleep again or wandered into some other unremembered dream . 
  At Frodo side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly ; but a change came over Frodo dreams and Frodo turned and groaned . Suddenly Frodo woke , or thought Pippin had waked , and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed Pippin dream : tip - tap , squeak : the noise was like branches fretting in the wind , twig - fingers scraping wall and window : creak , creak , creak . Pippin wondered if there were willow - trees close to the house ; and then suddenly Pippin had a dreadful feeling that Pippin was not in an ordinary house at all , but inside the willow and listening to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at Frodo again . Frodo sat up , and felt the soft pillows yield to Frodo hands , and Frodo lay down again relieved . Frodo seemed to hear the echo of words in Frodo ears : ‘ Fear nothing ! Have peace until the morning ! Heed no nightly noises ! ’ Then Frodo went to sleep again . 
  echo was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into Frodo quiet sleep : water streaming down gently , and then spreading , spreading irresistibly all round the house into a dark shoreless pool . echo gurgled under the walls , and was rising slowly but surely . ‘ I shall be drowned ! ’ Frodo thought . ‘ echo will find echo way in , and then I shall drown . ’ Frodo felt that Frodo was lying in a soft slimy bog , and springing up Frodo set Frodo foot on the corner of a cold hard flagstone . Then Frodo remembered where Frodo was and lay down again . Frodo seemed to hear or remember hearing : ‘ Nothing passes doors or windows save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill - top . ’ A little breath of sweet air moved the curtain . Frodo breathed deep and fell asleep again . 
  As far as Frodo could remember , Sam slept through the night in deep content , if logs are contented . 
  logs woke up , all four at once , in the morning light . Tom was moving about the room whistling like a starling . When Tom heard logs stir Tom clapped Tom hands , and cried : ‘ Hey ! Come merry dol ! derry dol ! My hearties ! ’ Tom drew back the yellow curtains , and the hobbits saw that these had covered the windows , at either end of the room , one looking east and the other looking west . 
  hobbits leapt up refreshed . Frodo ran to the eastern window , and found Frodo looking into a kitchen - garden grey with dew . Tom had half expected to see turf right up to the walls , turf all pocked with hoof - prints . Actually Tom view was screened by a tall line of beans on poles ; but above and far beyond beans the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise . top was a pale morning : in the East , behind long clouds like lines of soiled wool stained red at the edges , lay glimmering deeps of yellow . The sky spoke of rain to come ; but the light was broadening quickly , and the red flowers on the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves . 
  Pippin looked out of the western window , down into a pool of mist . The Forest was hidden under a fog . Pippin was like looking down on to a sloping cloud - roof from above . There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken into many plumes and billows : the valley of the Withywindle . The stream ran down the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows . Near at hand was a flower - garden and a clipped hedge silver - netted , and beyond that grey shaven grass pale with dew - drops . There was no willow - tree to be seen . 
  ‘ Good morning , merry friends ! ’ cried Tom , opening the eastern window wide . A cool air flowed in ; air had a rainy smell . ‘ Sun wo n’t show Sun face much today , I ’ m thinking . I have been walking wide , leaping on the hill - tops , since the grey dawn began , nosing wind and weather , wet grass underfoot , wet sky above me . I wakened Goldberry singing under window ; but naught wakes hobbit - folk in the early morning . In the night little folk wake up in the darkness , and sleep after light has come ! Ring a ding dillo ! Wake now , my merry friends ! Forget the nightly noises ! Ring a ding dillo del ! derry del , my hearties ! If you come soon you ’ll find breakfast on the table . If you come late you ’ll get grass and rain - water ! ’ 
  Needless to say – not that Tom ’s threat sounded very serious – the hobbits came soon , and left the table late and only when table was beginning to look rather empty . Neither Tom nor Goldberry were there . Tom could be heard about the house , clattering in the kitchen , and up and down the stairs , and singing here and there outside . The room looked westward over the mist - clouded valley , and the window was open . Water dripped down from the thatched eaves above . Before clouds had finished breakfast the clouds had joined into an unbroken roof , and a straight grey rain came softly and steadily down . Behind rain deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled . 
  As clouds looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it was flowing down the rain out of the sky , the clear voice of Goldberry singing up above clouds . clouds could hear few words , but it seemed plain to clouds that the song was a rain - song , as sweet as showers on dry hills , that told the tale of a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far below . The hobbits listened with delight ; and Frodo was glad in Frodo heart , and blessed the kindly weather , because weather delayed hobbits from departing . The thought of going had been heavy upon Frodo from the moment Frodo awoke ; but Frodo guessed now that hobbits would not go further that day . 
  The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds rolled up to spill clouds laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs . Nothing could be seen all round the house but falling water . Frodo stood near the open door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and go bubbling away down into the valley . Tom Bombadil came trotting round the corner of the house , waving Bombadil arms as if Bombadil was warding off the rain – and indeed when Frodo sprang over the threshold Frodo seemed quite dry , except for Frodo boots . These Frodo took off and put in the chimney - corner . Then Frodo sat in the largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round Bombadil . 
  ‘ This is Goldberry ’s washing day , ’ Bombadil said , ‘ and Goldberry autumn - cleaning . Too wet for hobbit - folk – let hobbits rest while hobbits are able ! folk ’s a good day for long tales , for questions and for answers , so Tom will start the talking . ’ 
  Bombadil then told hobbits many remarkable stories , sometimes half as if speaking to Bombadil , sometimes looking at hobbits suddenly with a bright blue eye under Bombadil deep brows . Often Bombadil voice would turn to song , and Bombadil would get out of Bombadil chair and dance about . Bombadil told hobbits tales of bees and flowers , the ways of trees , and the strange creatures of the Forest , about the evil things and good things , things friendly and things unfriendly , cruel things and kind things , and secrets hidden under brambles . 
  As hobbits listened , hobbits began to understand the lives of the Forest , apart from hobbits , indeed to feel hobbits as the strangers where all other things were at home . Moving constantly in and out of Forest talk was Old Man Willow , and Frodo learned now enough to content Forest , indeed more than enough , for talk was not comfortable lore . Tom ’s words laid bare the hearts of trees and words thoughts , which were often dark and strange , and filled with a hatred of things that go free upon the earth , gnawing , biting , breaking , hacking , burning : destroyers and usurpers . It was not called the Old Forest without reason , for reason was indeed ancient , a survivor of vast forgotten woods ; and in reason there lived yet , ageing no quicker than the hills , the fathers of the fathers of trees , remembering times when fathers were lords . The countless years had filled fathers with pride and rooted wisdom , and with malice . But none were more dangerous than the Great Willow : Forest heart was rotten , but Forest strength was green ; and Forest was cunning , and a master of winds , and Forest song and thought ran through the woods on both sides of the river . Forest grey thirsty spirit drew power out of the earth and spread like fine root - threads in the ground , and invisible twig - fingers in the air , till spirit had under spirit dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest from the Hedge to the Downs . 
  Suddenly Tom ’s talk left the woods and went leaping up the young stream , over bubbling waterfalls , over pebbles and worn rocks , and among small flowers in close grass and wet crannies , wandering at last up on to the Downs . rocks heard of the Great Barrows , and the green mounds , and the stone - rings upon the hills and in the hollows among the hills . Sheep were bleating in flocks . Green walls and white walls rose . There were fortresses on the heights . Kings of little kingdoms fought together , and the young Sun shone like fire on the red metal of Kings new and greedy swords . There was victory and defeat ; and towers fell , fortresses were burned , and flames went up into the sky . Gold was piled on the biers of dead kings and queens ; and mounds covered biers , and the stone doors were shut ; and the grass grew over all . Sheep walked for a while biting the grass , but soon the hills were empty again . A shadow came out of dark places far away , and the bones were stirred in the mounds . Barrow - wights walked in the hollow places with a clink of rings on cold fingers , and gold chains in the wind . Stone rings grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight . 
  The hobbits shuddered . Even in the Shire the rumour of the Barrow - wights of the Barrow - downs beyond the Forest had been heard . But it was not a tale that any hobbit liked to listen to , even by a comfortable fireside far away . These four now suddenly remembered what the joy of this house had driven from four minds : the house of Tom Bombadil nestled under the very shoulder of those dreaded hills . four lost the thread of Bombadil tale and shifted uneasily , looking aside at one another . 
  When four caught Bombadil words again four found that Bombadil had now wandered into strange regions beyond four memory and beyond four waking thought , into times when the world was wider , and the seas flowed straight to the western Shore ; and still on and back Tom went singing out into ancient starlight , when only the Elf - sires were awake . Then suddenly Bombadil stopped , and sires saw that Bombadil nodded as if Bombadil was falling asleep . The hobbits sat still before Bombadil , enchanted ; and it seemed as if , under the spell of Bombadil words , the wind had gone , and the clouds had dried up , and the day had been withdrawn , and darkness had come from East and West , and all the sky was filled with the light of white stars . 
  Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many days had passed Frodo could not tell . Frodo did not feel either hungry or tired , only filled with wonder . The stars shone through the window and the silence of the heavens seemed to be round Frodo . Frodo spoke at last out of Frodo wonder and a sudden fear of that silence : 
  ‘ Who are you , Master ? ’ Frodo asked . 
  ‘ Eh , what ? ’ said Tom sitting up , and Tom eyes glinting in the gloom . ‘ Do n’t you know my name yet ? That ’s the only answer . Tell me , who are you , alone , yourself and nameless ? But you are young and I am old . Eldest , that ’s what I am . Mark my words , my friends : Tom was here before the river and the trees ; Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first acorn . Tom made paths before the Big People , and saw the little People arriving . Tom was here before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow - wights . When the Elves passed westward , Tom was here already , before the seas were bent . Tom knew the dark under the stars when Lord was fearless – before the Dark Lord came from Outside . ’ 
  A shadow seemed to pass by the window , and the hobbits glanced hastily through the panes . When hobbits turned again , Goldberry stood in the door behind , framed in light . Goldberry held a candle , shielding candle flame from the draught with Goldberry hand ; and the light flowed through candle , like sunlight through a white shell . 
  ‘ The rain has ended , ’ Goldberry said ; ‘ and new waters are running downhill , under the stars . Let us now laugh and be glad ! ’ 
  ‘ And let us have food and drink ! ’ cried Tom . ‘ Long tales are thirsty . And long listening ’s hungry work , morning , noon , and evening ! ’ With that Tom jumped out of Tom chair , and with a bound took a candle from the chimney - shelf and lit candle in the flame that Goldberry held ; then Goldberry danced about the table . Suddenly Goldberry hopped through the door and disappeared . 
  Quickly Goldberry returned , bearing a large and laden tray . Then Tom and Goldberry set the table ; and the hobbits sat half in wonder and half in laughter : so fair was the grace of Goldberry and so merry and odd the caperings of Tom . Yet in some fashion hobbits seemed to weave a single dance , neither hindering the other , in and out of the room , and round about the table ; and with great speed food and vessels and lights were set in order . The boards blazed with candles , white and yellow . Tom bowed to Tom guests . ‘ Supper is ready , ’ said Goldberry ; and now the hobbits saw that Goldberry was clothed all in silver with a white girdle , and Goldberry shoes were like fishes ’ mail . But Tom was all in clean blue , blue as rain - washed forget - me - nots , and Tom had green stockings . 
  mail was a supper even better than before . The hobbits under the spell of Tom ’s words may have missed one meal or many , but when the food was before hobbits it seemed at least a week since hobbits had eaten . hobbits did not sing or even speak much for a while , and paid close attention to business . But after a time hobbits hearts and spirits rose high again , and hobbits voices rang out in mirth and laughter . 
  After hobbits had eaten , Goldberry sang many songs for hobbits , songs that began merrily in the hills and fell softly down into silence ; and in the silences songs saw in songs minds pools and waters wider than any songs had known , and looking into songs songs saw the sky below hobbits and the stars like jewels in the depths . Then once more Goldberry wished songs each good night and left songs by the fireside . But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied songs with questions . 
  Tom appeared already to know much about songs and all questions families , and indeed to know much of all the history and doings of the Shire down from days hardly remembered among the hobbits hobbits . Shire no longer surprised hobbits ; but Tom made no secret that Tom owed Tom recent knowledge largely to Farmer Maggot , whom Tom seemed to regard as a person of more importance than hobbits had imagined . ‘ There ’s earth under Tom old feet , and clay on Tom fingers ; wisdom in Tom bones , and both Tom eyes are open , ’ said Tom . It was also clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves , and it seemed that in some fashion , news had reached Tom from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo . 
  Indeed so much did Tom know , and so cunning was Tom questioning , that Frodo found Tom telling Gildor more about Bilbo and Gildor own hopes and fears than Gildor had told before even to Gandalf . Tom wagged Tom head up and down , and there was a glint in Tom eyes when Tom heard of the Riders . 
  ‘ Show me the precious Ring ! ’ Tom said suddenly in the midst of the story : and Frodo , to Tom own astonishment , drew out the chain from Tom pocket , and unfastening the Ring handed chain at once to Tom . 
  It seemed to grow larger as chain lay for a moment on Tom big brown - skinned hand . Then suddenly Tom put chain to Tom eye and laughed . For a second the hobbits had a vision , both comical and alarming , of Tom bright blue eye gleaming through a circle of gold . Then Tom put the Ring round the end of Tom little finger and held Ring up to the candlelight . For a moment the hobbits noticed nothing strange about this . Then hobbits gasped . There was no sign of Tom disappearing ! 
  Tom laughed again , and then Tom spun the Ring in the air – and Ring vanished with a flash . Frodo gave a cry – and Tom leaned forward and handed Frodo back to Tom with a smile . 
  Frodo looked at Ring closely , and rather suspiciously ( like one who has lent a trinket to a juggler ) . Ring was the same Ring , or looked the same and weighed the same : for that Ring had always seemed to Frodo to weigh strangely heavy in the hand . But something prompted Tom to make sure . Tom was perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so light of what even Gandalf thought so perilously important . Tom waited for an opportunity , when the talk was going again , and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers and light queer ways – then Tom slipped the Ring on . 
  Merry turned towards Tom to say something and gave a start , and checked an exclamation . Frodo was delighted ( in a way ): it was Tom own ring all right , for Merry was staring blankly at Tom chair , and obviously could not see Tom . Tom got up and crept quietly away from the fireside towards the outer door . 
  ‘ Hey there ! ’ cried Tom , glancing towards Tom with a most seeing look in Tom shining eyes . ‘ Hey ! Come Frodo , there ! Where be you a - going ? Old Tom Bombadil ’s not as blind as that yet . Take off your golden ring ! Your hand ’s more fair without that . Come back ! Leave your game and sit down beside me ! We must talk a while more , and think about the morning . Tom must teach the right road , and keep your feet from wandering . ’ 
  Frodo laughed ( trying to feel pleased ) , and taking off the Ring Frodo came and sat down again . Tom now told feet that Tom reckoned the Sun would shine tomorrow , and Sun would be a glad morning , and setting out would be hopeful . But feet would do well to start early ; for weather in that country was a thing that even Tom could not be sure of for long , and country would change sometimes quicker than Tom could change Tom jacket . ‘ I am no weather - master , ’ said Tom ; ‘ nor is aught that goes on two legs . ’ 
  By Tom advice feet decided to make nearly due North from Tom house , over the western and lower slopes of the Downs : feet might hope in that way to strike the East Road in a day ’s journey , and avoid the Barrows . Tom told feet not to be afraid – but to mind feet own business . 
  ‘ Keep to the green grass . Do n’t you go a - meddling with old stone or cold Wights or prying in Wights houses , unless you be strong folk with hearts that never falter ! ’ Tom said this more than once ; and Tom advised feet to pass barrows by on the west - side , if feet chanced to stray near one . Then Tom taught feet a rhyme to sing , if feet should by ill - luck fall into any danger or difficulty the next day . 
  Ho ! Tom Bombadil , Tom Bombadillo ! 
  By water , wood and hill , by the reed and willow , 
  By fire , sun and moon , harken now and hear us ! 
  Come , Tom Bombadil , for our need is near us ! 
  When each had sung this altogether after Bombadil , Bombadil clapped each each on the shoulder with a laugh , and taking candles led each back to each bedroom . 
  Chapter 8 
  FOG ON THE BARROW - DOWNS 
  That night each heard no noises . But either in Frodo dreams or out of each , Frodo could not tell which , Frodo heard a sweet singing running in Frodo mind : a song that seemed to come like a pale light behind a grey rain - curtain , and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver , until at last singing was rolled back , and a far green country opened before Frodo under a swift sunrise . 
  The vision melted into waking ; and there was Tom whistling like a tree - full of birds ; and the sun was already slanting down the hill and through the open window . Outside everything was green and pale gold . 
  After breakfast , which Tom again ate alone , Tom made ready to say farewell , as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such a morning : cool , bright , and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue . The air came fresh from the North - west . Tom quiet ponies were almost frisky , sniffing and moving restlessly . Tom came out of the house and waved sun hat and danced upon the doorstep , bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good speed . 
  Tom rode off along a path that wound away from behind the house , and went slanting up towards the north end of the hill - brow under which house sheltered . Tom had just dismounted to lead Tom ponies up the last steep slope , when suddenly Frodo stopped . 
  ‘ Goldberry ! ’ Frodo cried . ‘ My fair lady , clad all in silver green ! We have never said farewell to lady , nor seen lady since the evening ! ’ Frodo was so distressed that Frodo turned back ; but at that moment a clear call came rippling down . There on the hill - brow lady stood beckoning to Tom : lady hair was flying loose , and as hair caught the sun hair shone and shimmered . A light like the glint of water on dewy grass flashed from under lady feet as lady danced . 
  Tom hastened up the last slope , and stood breathless beside lady . Tom bowed , but with a wave of lady arm lady bade Tom look round ; and Tom looked out from the hill - top over lands under the morning . wave was now as clear and far - seen as wave had been veiled and misty when Tom stood upon the knoll in the Forest , which could now be seen rising pale and green out of the dark trees in the West . In that direction the land rose in wooded ridges , green , yellow , russet under the sun , beyond which lay hidden the valley of the Brandywine . To the South , over the line of the Withywindle , there was a distant glint like pale glass where the Brandywine River made a great loop in the lowlands and flowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits . Northward beyond the dwindling downs the land ran away in flats and swellings of grey and green and pale earth - colours , until land faded into a featureless and shadowy distance . Eastward the Barrow - downs rose , ridge behind ridge into the morning , and vanished out of eyesight into a guess : it was no more than a guess of blue and a remote white glimmer blending with the hem of the sky , but no spoke to blue , out of memory and old tales , of the high and distant mountains . 
  blue took a deep draught of the air , and felt that a skip and a few stout strides would bear blue wherever blue wished . It seemed fainthearted to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs towards the Road , when blue should be leaping , as lusty as Tom , over the stepping stones of the hills straight towards the Mountains . 
  Goldberry spoke to blue and recalled blue eyes and thoughts . ‘ Speed now , fair guests ! ’ Goldberry said . ‘ And hold to your purpose ! North with the wind in the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps ! Make haste while the Sun shines ! ’ And to Frodo Goldberry said : ‘ Farewell , Elf - friend , Sun was a merry meeting ! ’ 
  But Frodo found no words to answer . Farewell bowed low , and mounted friend pony , and followed by friend friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope behind the hill . Tom Bombadil ’s house and the valley , and the Forest were lost to view . The air grew warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside , and the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as walls breathed . Turning back , when walls reached the bottom of the green hollow , walls saw Goldberry , now small and slender like a sunlit flower against the sky : Goldberry was standing still watching walls , and Goldberry hands were stretched out towards walls . As walls looked Goldberry gave a clear call , and lifting up Goldberry hand Goldberry turned and vanished behind the hill . 
  walls way wound along the floor of the hollow , and round the green feet of a steep hill into another deeper and broader valley , and then over the shoulders of further hills , and down walls long limbs , and up walls smooth sides again , up on to new hill - tops and down into new valleys . There was no tree nor any visible water : it was a country of grass and short springy turf , silent except for the whisper of the air over the edges of the land , and high lonely cries of strange birds . As sun journeyed the sun mounted , and grew hot . Each time sun climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown less . When sun caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forest seemed to be smoking , as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf and root and mould . A shadow now lay round the edge of sight , a dark haze above which the upper sky was like a blue cap , hot and heavy . 
  About mid - day shadow came to a hill whose top was wide and flattened , like a shallow saucer with a green mounded rim . Inside there was no air stirring , and the sky seemed near shadow heads . shadow rode across and looked northwards . Then shadow hearts rose ; for it seemed plain that shadow had come further already than shadow had expected . Certainly the distances had now all become hazy and deceptive , but there could be no doubt that the Downs were coming to an end . A long valley lay below shadow winding away northwards , until valley came to an opening between two steep shoulders . Beyond , there seemed to be no more hills . Due north shadow faintly glimpsed a long dark line . ‘ That is a line of trees , ’ said Merry , ‘ and that must mark the Road . All along that for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing . Some say Some were planted in the old days . ’ 
  ‘ Splendid ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ If we make as good going this afternoon as we have done this morning , we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and be jogging on in search of a camping place . ’ But even as Frodo spoke Frodo turned Frodo glance eastwards , and Frodo saw that on that side the hills were higher and looked down upon shadow ; and all those hills were crowned with green mounds , and on some were standing stones , pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of green gums . 
  That view was somehow disquieting ; so shadow turned from the sight and went down into the hollow circle . In the midst of view there stood a single stone , standing tall under the sun above , and at this hour casting no shadow . view was shapeless and yet significant : like a landmark , or a guarding finger , or more like a warning . But landmark were now hungry , and the sun was still at the fearless noon ; so landmark set landmark backs against the east side of the stone . It was cool , as if the sun had had no power to warm power ; but at that time this seemed pleasant . There landmark took food and drink , and made as good a noon - meal under the open sky as anyone could wish ; for the food came from ‘ down under Hill ’ . Tom had provided landmark with plenty for the comfort of the day . landmark ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass . 
  Riding over the hills , and eating landmark fill , the warm sun and the scent of turf , lying a little too long , stretching out landmark legs and looking at the sky above landmark noses : these things are , perhaps , enough to explain what happened . However that may be : landmark woke suddenly and uncomfortably from a sleep landmark had never meant to take . The standing stone was cold , and stone cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward over landmark . The sun , a pale and watery yellow , was gleaming through the mist just above the west wall of the hollow in which landmark lay ; north , south , and east , beyond the wall the fog was thick , cold and white . The air was silent , heavy and chill . landmark ponies were standing crowded together with landmark heads down . 
  The hobbits sprang to hobbits feet in alarm , and ran to the western rim . hobbits found that hobbits were upon an island in the fog . Even as hobbits looked out in dismay towards the setting sun , dismay sank before hobbits eyes into a white sea , and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind . The fog rolled up to the walls and rose above walls , and as fog mounted fog bent over walls heads until fog became a roof : walls were shut in a hall of mist whose central pillar was the standing stone . 
  walls felt as if a trap was closing about walls ; but walls did not quite lose heart . walls still remembered the hopeful view walls had had of the line of the Road ahead , and walls still knew in which direction view lay . In any case , walls now had so great a dislike for that hollow place about the stone that no thought of remaining there was in walls minds . walls packed up as quickly as walls chilled fingers would work . 
  Soon walls were leading walls ponies in single file over the rim and down the long northward slope of the hill , down into a foggy sea . As walls went down the mist became colder and damper , and walls hair hung lank and dripping on walls foreheads . When walls reached the bottom it was so chill that walls halted and got out cloaks and hoods , which soon became bedewed with grey drops . Then , mounting walls ponies , walls went slowly on again , feeling walls way by the rise and fall of the ground . walls were steering , as well as walls could guess , for the gate - like opening at the far northward end of the long valley which walls had seen in the morning . Once walls were through the gap , walls had only to keep on in anything like a straight line and walls were bound in the end to strike the Road . walls thoughts did not go beyond that , except for a vague hope that perhaps away beyond the Downs there might be no fog . 
  walls going was very slow . To prevent walls getting separated and wandering in different directions walls went in file , with Frodo leading . Sam was behind Frodo , and after Frodo came Pippin , and then Merry . The valley seemed to stretch on endlessly . Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign . On either side ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist ; and Frodo guessed that walls were at last approaching the gap in the hills , the north - gate of the Barrow - downs . If walls could pass that , walls would be free . 
  ‘ Come on ! Follow me ! ’ Frodo called back over Frodo shoulder , and Frodo hurried forward . But Frodo hope soon changed to bewilderment and alarm . The dark patches grew darker , but patches shrank ; and suddenly Frodo saw , towering ominous before hope and leaning slightly towards one another like the pillars of a headless door , two huge standing stones . Frodo could not remember having seen any sign of these in the valley , when Frodo looked out from the hill in the morning . Frodo had passed between these almost before Frodo was aware : and even as Frodo did so darkness seemed to fall round Frodo . Frodo pony reared and snorted , and Frodo fell off . When Frodo looked back Frodo found that Frodo was alone : the others had not followed Frodo . 
  ‘ Sam ! ’ Frodo called . ‘ Pippin ! Merry ! Come along ! Why do n’t you keep up ? ’ 
  There was no answer . Fear took Frodo , and Frodo ran back past the stones shouting wildly : ‘ Sam ! Sam ! Merry ! Pippin ! ’ The pony bolted into the mist and vanished . From some way off , or so it seemed , Frodo thought Frodo heard a cry : ‘ Hoy ! Frodo ! Hoy ! ’ It was away eastward , on Frodo left as Frodo stood under the great stones , staring and straining into the gloom . Frodo plunged off in the direction of the call , and found Frodo going steeply uphill . 
  As Frodo struggled on Frodo called again , and kept on calling more and more frantically ; but Frodo heard no answer for some time , and then it seemed faint and far ahead and high above Frodo . ‘ Frodo ! Hoy ! ’ came the thin voices out of the mist : and then a cry that sounded like help , help ! often repeated , ending with a last help ! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut short . Frodo stumbled forward with all the speed Frodo could towards the cries ; but the light was now gone , and clinging night had closed about Frodo , so that it was impossible to be sure of any direction . Frodo seemed all the time to be climbing up and up . 
  Only the change in the level of the ground at Frodo feet told Frodo when Frodo at last came to the top of a ridge or hill . Frodo was weary , sweating and yet chilled . change was wholly dark . 
  ‘ Where are you ? ’ Frodo cried out miserably . 
  There was no reply . Frodo stood listening . Frodo was suddenly aware that change was getting very cold , and that up here a wind was beginning to blow , an icy wind . A change was coming in the weather . The mist was flowing past Frodo now in shreds and tatters . Frodo breath was smoking , and the darkness was less near and thick . Frodo looked up and saw with surprise that faint stars were appearing overhead amid the strands of hurrying cloud and fog . The wind began to hiss over the grass . 
  Frodo imagined suddenly that Frodo caught a muffled cry , and Frodo made towards cry ; and even as Frodo went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside , and the starry sky was unveiled . A glance showed Frodo that Frodo was now facing southwards and was on a round hill - top , which Frodo must have climbed from the north . Out of the east the biting wind was blowing . To Frodo right there loomed against the westward stars a dark black shape . A great barrow stood there . 
  ‘ Where are you ? ’ Frodo cried again , both angry and afraid . 
  ‘ Here ! ’ said a voice , deep and cold , that seemed to come out of the ground . ‘ I am waiting for you ! ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Frodo ; but Frodo did not run away . Frodo knees gave , and Frodo fell on the ground . Nothing happened , and there was no sound . Trembling Frodo looked up , in time to see a tall dark figure like a shadow against the stars . sound leaned over Frodo . Frodo thought there were two eyes , very cold though lit with a pale light that seemed to come from some remote distance . Then a grip stronger and colder than iron seized Frodo . The icy touch froze Frodo bones , and Frodo remembered no more . 
  When Frodo came to Frodo again , for a moment Frodo could recall nothing except a sense of dread . Then suddenly Frodo knew that Frodo was imprisoned , caught hopelessly ; Frodo was in a barrow . A Barrow - wight had taken Frodo , and Frodo was probably already under the dreadful spells of the Barrow - wights about which whispered tales spoke . Frodo dared not move , but lay as Frodo found Frodo : flat on Frodo back upon a cold stone with Frodo hands on Frodo breast . 
  But though Frodo fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the very darkness that was round Frodo , Frodo found Frodo as Frodo lay thinking about Bilbo Baggins and Frodo stories , of hands jogging along together in the lanes of the Shire and talking about roads and adventures . There is a seed of courage hidden ( often deeply , it is true ) in the heart of the fattest and most timid hobbit , waiting for some final and desperate danger to make it grow . Frodo was neither very fat nor very timid ; indeed , though Bilbo did not know hobbit , Bilbo ( and Gandalf ) had thought Bilbo the best hobbit in the Shire . Bilbo thought Bilbo had come to the end of Bilbo adventure , and a terrible end , but the thought hardened Bilbo . Bilbo found Bilbo stiffening , as if for a final spring ; Bilbo no longer felt limp like a helpless prey . 
  As Bilbo lay there , thinking and getting a hold of Bilbo , Bilbo noticed all at once that the darkness was slowly giving way : a pale greenish light was growing round Bilbo . It did not at first show Bilbo what kind of a place Bilbo was in , for the light seemed to be coming out of Bilbo , and from the floor beside Bilbo , and had not yet reached the roof or wall . Bilbo turned , and there in the cold glow Bilbo saw lying beside prey Sam , Pippin , and Merry . light were on light backs , and light faces looked deathly pale ; and light were clad in white . About light lay many treasures , of gold maybe , though in that light treasures looked cold and unlovely . On treasures heads were circlets , gold chains were about treasures waists , and on treasures fingers were many rings . Swords lay by Swords sides , and shields were at Swords feet . But across Swords three necks lay one long naked sword . 
  Suddenly a song began : a cold murmur , rising and falling . The voice seemed far away and immeasurably dreary , sometimes high in the air and thin , sometimes like a low moan from the ground . Out of the formless stream of sad but horrible sounds , strings of words would now and again shape strings : grim , hard , cold words , heartless and miserable . The night was railing against the morning of which night was bereaved , and the cold was cursing the warmth for which night hungered . Frodo was chilled to the marrow . After a while the song became clearer , and with dread in Sun heart Sun perceived that song had changed into an incantation : 
  Cold be hand and heart and bone , 
  and cold be sleep under stone : 
  never more to wake on stony bed , 
  never , till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead . 
  In the black wind the stars shall die , 
  and still on gold here let stars lie , 
  till the dark lord lifts Sun hand 
  over dead sea and withered land . 
  Sun heard behind Sun head a creaking and scraping sound . Raising Sun on one arm Sun looked , and saw now in the pale light that stars were in a kind of passage which behind stars turned a corner . Round the corner a long arm was groping , walking on arm fingers towards Sam , who was lying nearest , and towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon Sam . 
  At first Frodo felt as if Sam had indeed been turned into stone by the incantation . Then a wild thought of escape came to Sam . Sam wondered if Sam put on the Ring , whether the Barrow - wight would miss Sam , and Sam might find some way out . Sam thought of Sam running free over the grass , grieving for Merry , and Sam , and Pippin , but free and alive Sam . Gandalf would admit that there had been nothing else Gandalf could do . 
  But the courage that had been awakened in Gandalf was now too strong : Gandalf could not leave Gandalf friends so easily . Gandalf wavered , groping in Gandalf pocket , and then fought with Gandalf again ; and as Gandalf did so the arm crept nearer . Suddenly resolve hardened in Gandalf , and Gandalf seized a short sword that lay beside Gandalf , and kneeling Gandalf stooped low over the bodies of Gandalf companions . With what strength Gandalf had Gandalf hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist , and the hand broke off ; but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt . There was a shriek and the light vanished . In the dark there was a snarling noise . 
  Frodo fell forward over Merry , and Merry ’s face felt cold . All at once back into Merry mind , from which Frodo had disappeared with the first coming of the fog , came the memory of the house down under the Hill , and of Tom singing . Merry remembered the rhyme that Tom had taught Tom . In a small desperate voice Merry began : Ho ! Tom Bombadil ! and with that name Bombadil voice seemed to grow strong : it had a full and lively sound , and the dark chamber echoed as if to drum and trumpet . 
  Ho ! Tom Bombadil , Tom Bombadillo ! 
  By water , wood and hill , by the reed and willow , 
  By fire , sun and moon , harken now and hear us ! 
  Come , Tom Bombadil , for our need is near us ! 
  There was a sudden deep silence , in which Frodo could hear Frodo heart beating . After a long slow moment Frodo heard plain , but far away , as if Bombadil was coming down through the ground or through thick walls , an answering voice singing : 
  Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow , 
  Bright blue Frodo jacket is , and Frodo boots are yellow . 
  None has ever caught Frodo yet , for Tom , Frodo is the master : 
  Frodo songs are stronger songs , and Frodo feet are faster . 
  There was a loud rumbling sound , as of stones rolling and falling , and suddenly light streamed in , real light , the plain light of day . A low door - like opening appeared at the end of the chamber beyond Frodo ’s feet ; and there was Tom ’s head ( hat , feather , and all ) framed against the light of the sun rising red behind Tom . The light fell upon the floor , and upon the faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo . hobbits did not stir , but the sickly hue had left hobbits . hobbits looked now as if hobbits were only very deeply asleep . 
  Tom stooped , removed Tom hat , and came into the dark chamber , singing : 
  Get out , you old Wight ! Vanish in the sunlight ! 
  Shrivel like the cold mist , like the winds go wailing , 
  Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains ! 
  Come never here again ! Leave your barrow empty ! 
  Lost and forgotten be , darker than the darkness , 
  Where gates stand for ever shut , till the world is mended . 
  At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamber fell in with a crash . Then there was a long trailing shriek , fading away into an unguessable distance ; and after that silence . 
  ‘ Come , friend Frodo ! ’ said Tom . ‘ Let us get out on to clean grass ! You must help me bear grass . ’ 
  Together Tom carried out Merry , Pippin , and Sam . As Frodo left the barrow for the last time Frodo thought Frodo saw a severed hand wriggling still , like a wounded spider , in a heap of fallen earth . Tom went back in again , and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping . When Frodo came out Frodo was bearing in Frodo arms a great load of treasure : things of gold , silver , copper , and bronze ; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments . Frodo climbed the green barrow and laid things all on top in the sunshine . 
  There Frodo stood , with Frodo hat in Frodo hand and the wind in Frodo hair , and looked down upon the three hobbits , that had been laid on hobbits backs upon the grass at the west side of the mound . Raising Frodo right hand Frodo said in a clear and commanding voice : 
  Wake now my merry lads ! Wake and hear me calling ! 
  Warm now be heart and limb ! The cold stone is fallen ; 
  Dark door is standing wide ; dead hand is broken . 
  Night under Night is flown , and the Gate is open ! 
  To Frodo ’s great joy the hobbits stirred , stretched hobbits arms , rubbed hobbits eyes , and then suddenly sprang up . hobbits looked about in amazement , first at Frodo , and then at Tom standing large as life on the barrow - top above hobbits ; and then at hobbits in hobbits thin white rags , crowned and belted with pale gold , and jingling with trinkets . 
  ‘ What in the name of wonder ? ’ began Merry , feeling the golden circlet that had slipped over one eye . Then Tom stopped , and a shadow came over Tom face , and Tom closed Tom eyes . ‘ Of course , I remember ! ’ Tom said . ‘ The Tom of Carn Dûm came on us at night , and we were worsted . Ah ! the spear in my heart ! ’ Tom clutched at Tom breast . ‘ No ! No ! ’ Tom said , opening Tom eyes . ‘ What am I saying ? I have been dreaming . Where did you get to , Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ I thought that I was lost , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but I do n’t want to speak of breast . Let us think of what we are to do now ! Let us go on ! ’ 
  ‘ Dressed up like this , sir ? ’ said Sam . ‘ Where are my clothes ? ’ Sam flung Sam circlet , belt , and rings on the grass , and looked round helplessly , as if Sam expected to find Sam cloak , jacket , and breeches , and other hobbit - garments lying somewhere to hand . 
  ‘ You wo n’t find your clothes again , ’ said Tom , bounding down from the mound , and laughing as Tom danced round jacket in the sunlight . One would have thought that nothing dangerous or dreadful had happened ; and indeed the horror faded out of jacket hearts as jacket looked at Tom , and saw the merry glint in Tom eyes . 
  ‘ What do you mean ? ’ asked Pippin , looking at Pippin , half puzzled and half amused . ‘ Why not ? ’ 
  But Tom shook Tom head , saying : ‘ You ’ ve found yourselves again , out of the deep water . Clothes are but little loss , if you escape from drowning . Be glad , my merry friends , and let the warm sunlight heat now heart and limb ! Cast off these cold rags ! Run naked on the grass , while Tom goes a - hunting ! ’ 
  Tom sprang away down hill , whistling and calling . Looking down after Tom Frodo saw Tom running away southwards along the green hollow between head hill and the next , still whistling and crying : 
  Hey ! now ! Come hoy now ! Whither do you wander ? 
  Up , down , near or far , here , there or yonder ? 
  Sharp - ears , Wise - nose , Swish - tail and Bumpkin , 
  White - socks my little lad , and old Fatty Lumpkin ! 
  So Bumpkin sang , running fast , tossing up Bumpkin hat and catching hat , until Bumpkin was hidden by a fold of the ground : but for some time Bumpkin hey now ! hoy now ! came floating back down the wind , which had shifted round towards the south . 
  The air was growing very warm again . The hobbits ran about for a while on the grass , as Bumpkin told hobbits . Then hobbits lay basking in the sun with the delight of those that have been wafted suddenly from bitter winter to a friendly clime , or of people that , after being long ill and bedridden , wake one day to find that hobbits are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of promise . 
  By the time that Tom returned Tom were feeling strong ( and hungry ) . Bumpkin reappeared , hat first , over the brow of the hill , and behind sun came in an obedient line six ponies : Tom own five and one more . The last was plainly old Fatty Lumpkin : Lumpkin was larger , stronger , fatter ( and older ) than Tom own ponies . Merry , to whom the others belonged , had not , in fact , given others any such names , but others answered to the new names that Tom had given others for the rest of others lives . Tom called others one by one and others climbed over the brow and stood in a line . Then Tom bowed to the hobbits . 
  ‘ Here are your ponies , now ! ’ Lumpkin said . ‘ ponies ’ ve more sense ( in some ways ) than you wandering hobbits have – more sense in hobbits noses . For hobbits sniff danger ahead which you walk right into ; and if hobbits run to save hobbits , then hobbits run the right way . You must forgive hobbits all ; for though hobbits hearts are faithful , to face fear of Barrow - wights is not what hobbits were made for . See , here hobbits come again , bringing all hobbits burdens ! ’ 
  Merry , Sam , and Pippin now clothed Merry in spare garments from Merry packs ; and Merry soon felt too hot , for Merry were obliged to put on some of the thicker and warmer things that Merry had brought against the oncoming of winter . 
  ‘ Where does that other old animal , that Fatty Lumpkin , come from ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ Lumpkin ’s mine , ’ said Tom . ‘ My four - legged friend ; though I seldom ride Lumpkin , and Lumpkin wanders often far , free upon the hillsides . When your ponies stayed with me , ponies got to know my Lumpkin ; and ponies smelt Lumpkin in the night , and quickly ran to meet Lumpkin . I thought Lumpkin ’d look for ponies and with Lumpkin words of wisdom take all ponies fear away . But now , my jolly Lumpkin , old Tom ’s going to ride . Hey ! Tom ’s coming with you , just to set you on the road ; so Tom needs a pony . For you can not easily talk to hobbits that are riding , when you ’re on your own legs trying to trot beside hobbits . ’ 
  The hobbits were delighted to hear this , and thanked Tom many times ; but Tom laughed , and said that hobbits were so good at losing hobbits that Tom would not feel happy till Tom had seen hobbits safe over the borders of Tom land . ‘ I ’ ve got things to do , ’ Tom said : ‘ my making and my singing , my talking and my walking , and my watching of the country . Tom ca n’t be always near to open doors and willow - cracks . Tom has Tom house to mind , and Goldberry is waiting . ’ 
  land was still fairly early by the sun , something between nine and ten , and the hobbits turned hobbits minds to food . hobbits last meal had been lunch beside the standing stone the day before . hobbits breakfasted now off the remainder of Tom ’s provisions , meant for hobbits supper , with additions that Tom had brought with Tom . supper was not a large meal ( considering hobbits and the circumstances ) , but hobbits felt much better for supper . While hobbits were eating Tom went up to the mound , and looked through the treasures . Most of these Tom made into a pile that glistered and sparkled on the grass . Tom bade hobbits lie there ‘ free to all finders , birds , beasts , Elves or Men , and all kindly creatures ’ ; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and no Wight ever come back to spell . Wight chose for Wight from the pile a brooch set with blue stones , many - shaded like flax - flowers or the wings of blue butterflies . Wight looked long at pile , as if stirred by some memory , shaking Wight head , and saying at last : 
  ‘ Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for toy lady ! Fair was lady who long ago wore this on lady shoulder . Goldberry shall wear this now , and we will not forget lady ! ’ 
  For each of the hobbits Wight chose a dagger , long , leaf - shaped , and keen , of marvellous workmanship , damasked with serpent - forms in red and gold . hobbits gleamed as Wight drew hobbits from hobbits black sheaths , wrought of some strange metal , light and strong , and set with many fiery stones . Whether by some virtue in these sheaths or because of the spell that lay on the mound , the blades seemed untouched by time , unrusted , sharp , glittering in the sun . 
  ‘ Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit - people , ’ Wight said . ‘ Sharp blades are good to have , if Shire - folk go walking , east , south , or far away into dark and danger . ’ Then Wight told sheaths that these blades were forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse : sheaths were foes of the Dark Lord , but sheaths were overcome by the evil king of Carn Dûm in the Land of Angmar . 
  ‘ Few now remember blades , ’ Tom murmured , ‘ yet still some go wandering , sons of forgotten kings walking in loneliness , guarding from evil things folk that are heedless . ’ 
  The hobbits did not understand Tom words , but as Tom spoke hobbits had a vision as vision were of a great expanse of years behind hobbits , like a vast shadowy plain over which there strode shapes of Men , tall and grim with bright swords , and last came one with a star on Tom brow . Then the vision faded , and hobbits were back in the sunlit world . It was time to start again . hobbits made ready , packing hobbits bags and lading hobbits ponies . hobbits new weapons hobbits hung on hobbits leather belts under hobbits jackets , feeling hobbits very awkward , and wondering if hobbits would be of any use . Fighting had not before occurred to any of hobbits as one of the adventures in which hobbits flight would land hobbits . 
  At last hobbits set off . hobbits led hobbits ponies down the hill ; and then mounting hobbits trotted quickly along the valley . hobbits looked back and saw the top of the old mound on the hill , and from mound the sunlight on the gold went up like a yellow flame . Then hobbits turned a shoulder of the Downs and shoulder was hidden from view . 
  Though Frodo looked about him on every side him saw no sign of the great stones standing like a gate , and before long hobbits came to the northern gap and rode swiftly through , and the land fell away before hobbits . land was a merry journey with Tom Bombadil trotting gaily beside hobbits , or before hobbits , on Fatty Lumpkin , who could move much faster than Lumpkin girth promised . Tom sang most of the time , but land was chiefly nonsense , or else perhaps a strange language unknown to the hobbits , an ancient language whose words were mainly those of wonder and delight . 
  hobbits went forward steadily , but hobbits soon saw that the Road was further away than hobbits had imagined . Even without a fog , hobbits sleep at mid - day would have prevented hobbits from reaching - until after nightfall on the day before . The dark line hobbits had seen was not a line of trees but a line of bushes growing on the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on the further side . Tom said that line had once been the boundary of a kingdom , but a very long time ago . Tom seemed to remember something sad about line , and would not say much . 
  hobbits climbed down and out of the dike and through a gap in the wall , and then Tom turned due north , for hobbits had been bearing somewhat to the west . The land was now open and fairly level , and hobbits quickened hobbits pace , but the sun was already sinking low when at last hobbits saw a line of tall trees ahead , and hobbits knew that hobbits had come back to the Road after many unexpected adventures . hobbits galloped hobbits ponies over the last furlongs , and halted under the long shadows of the trees . hobbits were on the top of a sloping bank , and the Road , now dim as evening drew on , wound away below hobbits . At this point Road ran nearly from South - west to North - east , and on hobbits right Road fell quickly down into a wide hollow . It was rutted and bore many signs of the recent heavy rain ; there were pools and pot - holes full of water . 
  hobbits rode down the bank and looked up and down . There was nothing to be seen . ‘ Well , here we are again at last ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I suppose we have n’t lost more than two days by my short cut through the Forest ! But perhaps the delay will prove useful – delay may have put days off our trail . ’ 
  The others looked at Frodo . The shadow of the fear of the Black Riders came suddenly over others again . Ever since others had entered the Forest others had thought chiefly of getting back to the Road ; only now when Road lay beneath others feet did others remember the danger which pursued others , and was more than likely to be lying in wait for feet upon the Road Road . feet looked anxiously back towards the setting sun , but the Road was brown and empty . 
  ‘ Do you think , ’ asked Pippin hesitatingly , ‘ do you think we may be pursued , tonight ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I hope not tonight , ’ answered Tom Bombadil ; ‘ nor perhaps the next day . But do not trust my guess ; for I can not tell for certain . Out east my knowledge fails . Tom is not master of Riders from the Black Land far beyond Tom country . ’ 
  All the same the hobbits wished Bombadil was coming with hobbits . hobbits felt that Bombadil would know how to deal with Black Riders , if anyone did . hobbits would soon now be going forward into lands wholly strange to Riders , and beyond all but the most vague and distant legends of the Shire , and in the gathering twilight hobbits longed for home . A deep loneliness and sense of loss was on hobbits . hobbits stood silent , reluctant to make the final parting , and only slowly became aware that Tom was wishing hobbits farewell , and telling Tom to have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting . 
  ‘ Tom will give you good advice , till this day is over ( after that your own luck must go with you and guide you ): four miles along the Road you ’ll come upon a village , Bree under Bree - hill , with doors looking westward . There you ’ll find an old inn that is called The Prancing Pony . Barliman Butterbur is the worthy keeper . There you can stay the night , and afterwards the morning will speed you upon your way . Be bold , but wary ! Keep up your merry hearts , and ride to meet your fortune ! ’ 
  hearts begged Butterbur to come at least as far as the inn and drink once more with Pony ; but Butterbur laughed and refused , saying : 
  Tom ’s country ends here : Butterbur will not pass the borders . 
  Tom has Tom house to mind , and Goldberry is waiting ! 
  Then Tom turned , tossed up Tom hat , leaped on Lumpkin ’s back , and rode up over the bank and away singing into the dusk . 
  The hobbits climbed up and watched Tom until Tom was out of sight . 
  ‘ I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil , ’ said Sam . ‘ Bombadil ’s a caution and no mistake . I reckon we may go a good deal further and see naught better , nor queerer . But I wo n’t deny I ’ll be glad to see this Prancing Pony Bombadil spoke of . I hope Pony ’ll be like The Green Dragon away back home ! What sort of folk are caution in Bree ? ’ 
  ‘ There are hobbits in Bree , ’ said Merry , ‘ as well as Big Folk . I daresay Folk will be homelike enough . The Pony is a good inn by all accounts . My people ride out there now and again . ’ 
  ‘ It may be all we could wish , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but all is outside the Shire all the same . Do n’t make yourselves too much at home ! Please remember – all of you – that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned . I am Mr. Underhill , if any name must be given . ’ 
  Underhill now mounted name ponies and rode off silently into the evening . Darkness came down quickly , as name plodded slowly downhill and up again , until at last name saw lights twinkling some distance ahead . 
  Before name rose Bree - Underhill barring the way , a dark mass against misty stars ; and under mass western flank nestled a large village . Towards mass name now hurried desiring only to find a fire , and a door between stars and the night . 
  Chapter 9 
  AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 
  Bree was the chief village of the Bree - land , a small inhabited region , like an island in the empty lands round about . Besides Bree village , there was Staddle on the other side of the hill , Combe in a deep valley a little further eastward , and Archet on the edge of the Chetwood . Lying round Bree - hill and the villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland only a few miles broad . 
  The Men of Bree were brown - haired , broad , and rather short , cheerful and independent : Men belonged to nobody but Men ; but Men were more friendly and familiar with Hobbits , Dwarves , Elves , and other inhabitants of the world about nobody than was ( or is ) usual with Big People . According to Men own tales Men were the original inhabitants and were the descendants of the first Men that ever wandered into the West of the middle - world . Few had survived the turmoils of the Elder Days ; but when the Kings returned again over the Great Sea Kings had found the Bree - Bree still there , and Kings were still there now , when the memory of the old Kings had faded into the grass . 
  In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west , or within a hundred leagues of the Shire . But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were mysterious wanderers . The Bree - folk called wanderers Rangers , and knew nothing of wanderers origin . wanderers were taller and darker than the Men of Bree and were believed to have strange powers of sight and hearing , and to understand the languages of beasts and birds . wanderers roamed at will southwards , and eastwards even as far as the Misty Mountains ; but wanderers were now few and rarely seen . When wanderers appeared wanderers brought news from afar , and told strange forgotten tales which were eagerly listened to ; but the Bree - folk did not make friends of wanderers . 
  There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree - land ; and families claimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the world , one that was founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized . families lived mostly in Staddle though there were some in Bree some , especially on the higher slopes of the hill , above the houses of the Men . The Big Folk and the Little Folk ( as Folk called one another ) were on friendly terms , minding Folk own affairs in Folk own ways , but both rightly regarding both as necessary parts of the Bree - folk . Nowhere else in the world was this peculiar ( but excellent ) arrangement to be found . 
  The Bree - Folk , Big and Little , did not both travel much ; and the affairs of the four villages were both chief concern . Occasionally the Hobbits of Bree went as far as Buckland , or the Eastfarthing ; but though both little land was not much further than a day ’s riding east of the Brandywine Bridge , the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom visited land . An occasional Bucklander or adventurous Took would come out to the Inn for a night or two , but even that was becoming less and less usual . The Shire - hobbits referred to those of Bree , and to any others that lived beyond the borders , as Outsiders , and took very little interest in Outsiders , considering Outsiders dull and uncouth . There were probably many more Outsiders scattered about in the West of the World in those days than the people of the Shire imagined . Some , doubtless , were no better than tramps , ready to dig a hole in any bank and stay only as long as Some suited tramps . But in the Bree - land , at any rate , the hobbits were decent and prosperous , and no more rustic than most of hobbits distant relatives Inside . It was not yet forgotten that there had been a time when there was much coming and going between the Shire and Bree . There was Bree - blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts . 
  The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the Big Folk , mostly above the Road , nestling on the hillside with windows looking west . On that side , running in more than half a circle from the hill and back to side , there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the inner side . Over this the Road crossed by a causeway ; but where Road pierced the hedge Road was barred by a great gate . There was another gate in the southern corner where the Road ran out of the village . The gates were closed at nightfall ; but just inside dike were small lodges for the gatekeepers . 
  Down on the Road , where Down swept to the right to go round the foot of the hill , there was a large inn . It had been built long ago when the traffic on the roads had been far greater . For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways ; another ancient road crossed the East Road just outside the dike at the western end of the village , and in former days Men and other folk of various sorts had travelled much on dike . Strange as News from Bree was still a saying in the Eastfarthing , descending from those days , when news from North , South , and East could be heard in the inn , and when the Shire - hobbits used to go more often to hear East . But the Northern Lands had long been desolate , and the North Road was now seldom used : Road was grass - grown , and the Bree - folk called Road the Greenway . 
  The Inn of Bree was still there , however , and the innkeeper was an important person . innkeeper house was a meeting place for the idle , talkative , and inquisitive among the inhabitants , large and small , of the four villages ; and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers , and for such travellers ( mostly dwarves ) as still journeyed on the East Road , to and from the Mountains . 
  house was dark , and white stars were shining , when Frodo and Frodo companions came at last to the Greenway - crossing and drew near the village . stars came to the West - gate and found gate shut ; but at the door of the lodge beyond gate , there was a man sitting . man jumped up and fetched a lantern and looked over the gate at stars in surprise . 
  ‘ What do you want , and where do you come from ? ’ man asked gruffly . 
  ‘ We are making for the inn here , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ We are journeying east and can not go further tonight . ’ 
  ‘ Hobbits ! Four hobbits ! And what ’s more , out of the Shire by hobbits talk , ’ said the gatekeeper , softly as if speaking to gatekeeper . gatekeeper stared at hobbits darkly for a moment , and then slowly opened the gate and let hobbits ride through . 
  ‘ We do n’t often see Shire - folk riding on the Road at night , ’ gatekeeper went on , as hobbits halted a moment by gatekeeper door . ‘ You ’ll pardon my wondering what business takes you away east of Bree ! What may your names be , might I ask ? ’ 
  ‘ Our names and our business are our own , and this does not seem a good place to discuss names , ’ said Frodo , not liking the look of the Frodo or the tone of gatekeeper voice . 
  ‘ Your business is your own , no doubt , ’ said the Frodo ; ‘ but business ’s my business to ask questions after nightfall . ’ 
  ‘ We are hobbits from Buckland , and we have a fancy to travel and to stay at the inn here , ’ put in Merry . ‘ I am Mr. Brandybuck . Is that enough for you ? The Bree - folk used to be fair - spoken to travellers , or so I had heard . ’ 
  ‘ All right , all right ! ’ said the man . ‘ I meant no offence . But you ’ll find maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate will be asking you questions . There ’s queer folk about . If you go on to The Pony , you ’ll find you ’re not the only guests . ’ 
  Pony wished guests good night , and guests said no more ; but Frodo could see in the lantern - light that the Frodo was still eyeing guests curiously . Frodo was glad to hear the gate clang to behind guests , as guests rode forward . Frodo wondered why the Frodo was so suspicious , and whether anyone had been asking for news of a party of hobbits . Could anyone have been Gandalf ? Gandalf might have arrived , while guests were delayed in the Forest and the Downs . But there was something in the look and the voice of the gatekeeper that made Gandalf uneasy . 
  The Gandalf stared after the hobbits for a moment , and then Gandalf went back to Gandalf house . As soon as Gandalf back was turned , a dark figure climbed quickly in over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street . 
  The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope , passing a few detached houses , and drew up outside the inn . The houses looked large and strange to houses . Sam stared up at the inn with a three storeys and many windows , and felt Sam heart sink . Sam had imagined Sam meeting giants taller than trees , and other creatures even more terrifying , some time or other in the course of Sam journey ; but at the moment Sam was finding Sam first sight of Men and creatures tall houses quite enough , indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring day . Sam pictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the inn - yard , and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows . 
  ‘ We surely are n’t going to stay here for the night , are we , sir ? ’ Sam exclaimed . ‘ If there are hobbit - folk in these parts , why do n’t we look for some that would be willing to take us in ? some would be more homelike . ’ 
  ‘ What ’s wrong with the inn ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Tom Bombadil recommended homelike . I expect homelike ’s homelike enough inside . ’ 
  Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes . house had a front on the Road , and two wings running back on land partly cut out of the lower slopes of the hill , so that at the rear the second - floor windows were level with the ground . There was a wide arch leading to a courtyard between the two wings , and on the left under the arch there was a large doorway reached by a few broad steps . The door was open and light streamed out of door . Above the arch there was a lamp , and beneath door swung a large signboard : a fat white pony reared up on door hind legs . Over the door was painted in white letters : THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN BUTTERBUR . Many of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains . 
  As curtains hesitated outside in the gloom , someone began singing a merry song inside , and many cheerful voices joined loudly in the chorus . curtains listened to this encouraging sound for a moment and then got off curtains ponies . The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping . 
  curtains led curtains ponies under the arch , and leaving ponies standing in the yard ponies climbed up the steps . Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a short fat man with a bald head and a red face . man had a white apron on , and was bustling out of one door and in through another , carrying a tray laden with full mugs . 
  ‘ Can we — ’ began Frodo . 
  ‘ Half a minute , if you please ! ’ shouted the Frodo over man shoulder , and vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke . In a moment man was out again , wiping man hands on man apron . 
  ‘ Good evening , little master ! ’ man said , bending down . ‘ What may you be wanting ? ’ 
  ‘ Beds for four , and stabling for five ponies , if that can be managed . Are you Mr. Butterbur ? ’ 
  ‘ That ’s right ! Barliman is my name . Barliman Butterbur at your service ! You ’re from the Shire , eh ? ’ man said , and then suddenly man clapped man hand to man forehead , as if trying to remember something . ‘ Hobbits ! ’ man cried . ‘ Now what does that remind me of ? Might I ask your names , sirs ? ’ 
  ‘ Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ and this is Sam Gamgee . My name is Underhill . ’ 
  ‘ There now ! ’ said Mr. Butterbur , snapping Butterbur fingers . ‘ name ’s gone again ! But name ’ll come back , when I have time to think . I ’ m run off my feet ; but I ’ll see what I can do for you . We do n’t often get a party out of the Shire nowadays , and I should be sorry not to make you welcome . But there is such a crowd already in the house tonight as there has n’t been for long enough . It never rains but house pours , we say in Bree . ’ 
  ‘ Hi ! Nob ! ’ Bree shouted . ‘ Where are you , you woolly - footed slowcoach ? Nob ! ’ 
  ‘ Coming , sir ! Coming ! ’ A cheery - looking hobbit bobbed out of a door , and seeing the travellers , stopped short and stared at travellers with great interest . 
  ‘ Where ’s Bob ? ’ asked the landlord . ‘ You do n’t know ? Well , find Bob ! Double sharp ! I have n’t got six legs , nor six eyes neither ! Tell Bob there ’s five ponies that have to be stabled . Bob must find room somehow . ’ Nob trotted off with a grin and a wink . 
  ‘ Well now , what was I going to say ? ’ said Mr. Butterbur , tapping Butterbur forehead . ‘ One thing drives out another , so to speak . I ’ m that busy tonight , my head is going round . There ’s a party that came up the Greenway from down South last night – and that was strange enough to begin with . Then there ’s a travelling company of dwarves going West come in this evening . And now there ’s you . If you were n’t hobbits , I doubt if we could house you . But we ’ ve got a room or two in the north wing that were made special for hobbits , when this place was built . On the ground floor as hobbits usually prefer ; round windows and all as hobbits like all . I hope you ’ll be comfortable . You ’ll be wanting supper , I do n’t doubt . As soon as may be . This way now ! ’ 
  He led hobbits a short way down a passage , and opened a door . ‘ Here is a nice little parlour ! ’ He said . ‘ I hope parlour will suit . Excuse me now . I ’ m that busy . No time for talking . I must be trotting . parlour ’s hard work for two legs , but I do n’t get thinner . I ’ll look in again later . If you want anything , ring the hand - bell , and Nob will come . If Nob do n’t come , ring and shout ! ’ 
  Off Nob went at last , and left Off feeling rather breathless . Nob seemed capable of an endless stream of talk , however busy Nob might be . ring found ring in a small and cosy room . There was a bit of bright fire burning on the hearth , and in front of fire were some low and comfortable chairs . There was a round table , already spread with a white cloth , and on table was a large hand - bell . But Nob , the hobbit servant , came bustling in long before servant thought of ringing . Nob brought candles and a tray full of plates . 
  ‘ Will you be wanting anything to drink , masters ? ’ Nob asked . ‘ And shall I show you the bedrooms , while your supper is got ready ? ’ 
  servant were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer when Mr. Butterbur and Nob came in again . In a twinkling the table was laid . There was hot soup , cold meats , a blackberry tart , new loaves , slabs of butter , and half a ripe cheese : good plain food , as good as the Shire could show , and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam ’s misgivings ( already much relieved by the excellence of the beer ) . 
  The landlord hovered round for a little , and then prepared to leave soup . ‘ I do n’t know whether you would care to join the company , when you have supped , ’ landlord said , standing at the door . ‘ Perhaps you would rather go to your beds . Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you , if you had a mind . We do n’t get Outsiders – travellers from the Shire , I should say , begging your pardon – often ; and we like to hear a bit of news , or any story or song you may have in mind . But as you please ! Ring the bell , if you lack anything ! ’ 
  So refreshed and encouraged did travellers feel at the end of travellers supper ( about three quarters of an hour ’s steady going , not hindered by unnecessary talk ) that Frodo , Pippin , and Sam decided to join the Pippin . Merry said Frodo would be too stuffy . ‘ I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit , and perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air . Mind your Ps and Qs , and do n’t forget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret , and are still on the high - road and not very far from the Shire ! ’ 
  ‘ All right ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Mind yourself ! Do n’t get lost , and do n’t forget that Shire is safer indoors ! ’ 
  The company was in the big common - room of the inn . The gathering was large and mixed , as Frodo discovered , when Frodo eyes got used to the light . This came chiefly from a blazing log - fire , for the three lamps hanging from the beams were dim , and half veiled in smoke . Barliman Butterbur was standing near the fire , talking to a couple of dwarves and one or two strange - looking men . On the benches were various folk : men of Bree , a collection of local hobbits ( sitting chattering together ) , a few more dwarves , and other vague figures difficult to make out away in the shadows and corners . 
  As soon as the Shire - hobbits entered , there was a chorus of welcome from the Bree - landers . The strangers , especially those that had come up the Greenway , stared at those curiously . The landlord introduced the newcomers to the Bree - folk , so quickly that , though newcomers caught many names , newcomers were seldom sure who the names belonged to . The Men of Bree seemed all to have rather botanical ( and to the Shire - folk rather odd ) names , like Rushlight , Goatleaf , Heathertoes , Appledore , Thistlewool and Ferny ( not to mention Butterbur ) . Some of the hobbits had similar names . The Mugworts , for instance , seemed numerous . But most of hobbits had natural names , such as Banks , Brockhouse , Longholes , Sandheaver , and Tunnelly , many of which were used in the Shire . There were several Underhills from Staddle , and as Underhills could not imagine sharing a name without being related , Underhills took Frodo to Underhills hearts as a long - lost cousin . 
  The Bree - hobbits were , in fact , friendly and inquisitive , and Frodo soon found that some explanation of what Frodo was doing would have to be given . Frodo gave out that Frodo was interested in history and geography ( at which there was much wagging of heads , although neither of these words were much used in the Bree - dialect ) . Frodo said Frodo was thinking of writing a book ( at which there was silent astonishment ) , and that Frodo and Frodo friends wanted to collect information about hobbits living outside the Shire , especially in the eastern lands . 
  At this a chorus of voices broke out . If Frodo had really wanted to write a book , and had had many ears , Frodo would have learned enough for several chapters in a few minutes . And if that was not enough , Frodo was given a whole list of names , beginning with ‘ Old Barliman here ’ , to whom Frodo could go for further information . But after a time , as Frodo did not show any sign of writing a book on the spot , the hobbits returned to hobbits questions about doings in the Shire . Frodo did not prove very communicative , and Frodo soon found Shire sitting alone in a corner , listening and looking around . 
  The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant events and telling news of a kind that was becoming only too familiar . There was trouble away in the South , and it seemed that the Frodo who had come up the Greenway were on the move , looking for lands where lands could find some peace . The Bree - folk were sympathetic , but plainly not very ready to take a large number of strangers into lands little land . One of the travellers , a squint - eyed ill - favoured fellow , was foretelling that more and more people would be coming north in the near future . ‘ If room is n’t found for people , people ’ll find room for people . people ’ ve a right to live , same as other folk , ’ fellow said loudly . The local inhabitants did not look pleased at the prospect . 
  The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this , as it did not at the moment seem to concern hobbits . Big Folk could hardly beg for lodgings in hobbit - holes . lodgings were more interested in Sam and Pippin , who were now feeling quite at home , and were chatting gaily about events in the Shire . Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the roof of the Town Hole in Michel Delving : Will Whitfoot , the Mayor , and the fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing , had been buried in chalk , and came out like a floured dumpling . But there were several questions asked that made Frodo a little uneasy . One of the Bree - landers , who seemed to have been in the Shire several times , wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who Underhills were related to . 
  Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange - looking weather - beaten man , sitting in the shadows near the wall , was also listening intently to the hobbit - talk . man had a tall tankard in front of Westfarthing , and was smoking a long - stemmed pipe curiously carved . Westfarthing legs were stretched out before Westfarthing , showing high boots of supple leather that fitted Westfarthing well , but had seen much wear and were now caked with mud . A travel - stained cloak of heavy dark - green cloth was drawn close about Westfarthing , and in spite of the heat of the room Westfarthing wore a hood that overshadowed Westfarthing face ; but the gleam of Westfarthing eyes could be seen as Westfarthing watched the hobbits . 
  ‘ Who is that ? ’ Frodo asked , when Frodo got a chance to whisper to Mr. Butterbur . ‘ I do n’t think you introduced Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ Frodo ? ’ said the landlord in an answering whisper , cocking an eye without turning landlord head . ‘ I do n’t rightly know . Frodo is one of the wandering folk – Rangers we call one . Frodo seldom talks : not but what Frodo can tell a rare tale when Frodo has the mind . Frodo disappears for a month , or a year , and then Frodo pops up again . Frodo was in and out pretty often last spring ; but I have n’t seen Frodo about lately . What Frodo right name is I ’ ve never heard : but Frodo ’s known round here as Strider . Goes about at a great pace on Frodo long shanks ; though Frodo do n’t tell nobody what cause Frodo has to hurry . But there ’s no accounting for East and West , as we say in Bree , meaning the Rangers and the Shire - folk , begging your pardon . Funny you should ask about Frodo . ’ But at that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away by a demand for more ale and Butterbur last remark remained unexplained . 
  Frodo found that Strider was now looking at Butterbur , as if Butterbur had heard or guessed all that had been said . Presently , with a wave of Butterbur hand and a nod , Butterbur invited Frodo to come over and sit by Frodo . As Frodo drew near Butterbur threw back Butterbur hood , showing a shaggy head of dark hair flecked with grey , and in a pale stern face a pair of keen grey eyes . 
  ‘ I am called Strider , ’ Butterbur said in a low voice . ‘ I am very pleased to meet you , Master – Underhill , if old Butterbur got your name right . ’ 
  ‘ Butterbur did , ’ said Frodo stiffly . Frodo felt far from comfortable under the stare of those keen eyes . 
  ‘ Well , Master Underhill , ’ said Strider , ‘ if I were you , I should stop your young friends from talking too much . Drink , fire , and chance - meeting are pleasant enough , but , well – this is n’t the Shire . There are queer folk about . Though I say folk as should n’t , you may think , ’ Frodo added with a wry smile , seeing Frodo ’s glance . ‘ And there have been even stranger travellers through Bree lately , ’ Frodo went on , watching Frodo ’s face . 
  Frodo returned Bree gaze but said nothing ; and Strider made no further sign . Bree attention seemed suddenly to be fixed on Pippin . To Pippin alarm Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took , encouraged by Pippin success with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving , was now actually giving a comic account of Bilbo ’s farewell party . Pippin was already giving an imitation of the Speech , and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance . 
  Frodo was annoyed . Disappearance was a harmless enough tale for most of the local hobbits , no doubt : just a funny story about those funny people away beyond the River ; but some ( old Butterbur , for instance ) knew a thing or two , and had probably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo ’s vanishing . Butterbur would bring the name of Baggins to name minds , especially if there had been inquiries in Bree after that name . 
  Frodo fidgeted , wondering what to do . Pippin was evidently much enjoying the attention Pippin was getting , and had become quite forgetful of name danger . Frodo had a sudden fear that in Pippin present mood Pippin might even mention the Ring ; and that might well be disastrous . 
  ‘ You had better do something quick ! ’ whispered Strider in Pippin ear . 
  Frodo jumped up and stood on a table , and began to talk . The attention of Pippin ’s audience was disturbed . Some of the hobbits looked at Frodo and laughed and clapped , thinking that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as was good for Pippin . 
  Frodo suddenly felt very foolish , and found Pippin ( as was Pippin habit when making a speech ) fingering the things in Pippin pocket . Pippin felt the Ring on Ring chain , and quite unaccountably the desire came over Pippin to slip Ring on and vanish out of the silly situation . It seemed to Pippin , somehow , as if the suggestion came to Pippin from outside , from someone or something in the room . Pippin resisted the temptation firmly , and clasped the Ring in Pippin hand , as if to keep a hold on Ring and prevent Ring from escaping or doing any mischief . At any rate Ring gave Pippin no inspiration . Pippin spoke ‘ a few suitable words ’ , as all would have said in the Shire : We are all very much gratified by the kindness of your reception , and I venture to hope that my brief visit will help to renew the old ties of friendship between the Shire and Bree ; and then Pippin hesitated and coughed . 
  Everyone in the room was now looking at Pippin . ‘ A song ! ’ shouted one of the hobbits . ‘ A song ! A song ! ’ shouted all the others . ‘ Come on now , master , sing us something that we have n’t heard before ! ’ 
  For a moment Frodo stood gaping . Then in desperation Pippin began a ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of ( and indeed rather proud of , for Pippin had made up the words Pippin ) . It was about an inn ; and that is probably why that came into Frodo ’s mind just then . Here that is in full . Only a few words of that are now , as a rule , remembered . 
  There is an inn , a merry old inn 
  beneath an old grey hill , 
  And there words brew a beer so brown 
  That the Man in the Moon Man came down 
  one night to drink Pippin fill . 
  The ostler has a tipsy cat 
  that plays a five - stringed fiddle ; 
  And up and down ostler runs ostler bow , 
  Now squeaking high , now purring low , 
  now sawing in the middle . 
  The landlord keeps a little dog 
  that is mighty fond of jokes ; 
  When there ’s good cheer among the guests , 
  landlord cocks an ear at all the jests 
  and laughs until landlord chokes . 
  guests also keep a hornéd cow 
  as proud as any queen ; 
  But music turns cow head like ale , 
  And makes cow wave cow tufted tail 
  and dance upon the green . 
  And O ! the rows of silver dishes 
  and the store of silver spoons ! 
  For Sunday * there ’s a special pair , 
  And these pair polish up with care 
  on Saturday afternoons . 
  The Man in the Moon was drinking deep , 
  and the cat began to wail ; 
  A dish and a spoon on the table danced , 
  The cow in the garden madly pranced , 
  and the little dog chased dog tail . 
  The Moon in the Moon took another mug , 
  and then rolled beneath dog chair ; 
  And there dog dozed and dreamed of ale , 
  Till in the sky the stars were pale , 
  and dawn was in the air . 
  Then the ostler said to ostler tipsy cat : 
  ‘ The white horses of the Moon , 
  horses neigh and champ horses silver bits ; 
  But horses master ’s been and drowned master wits , 
  and the Sun’ll be rising soon ! ’ 
  So the cat on cat fiddle played hey - diddle - diddle , 
  a jig that would wake the dead : 
  cat squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune , 
  While the landlord shook the Moon in the Moon : 
  ‘ Sun’ll ’s after three ! ’ cat said . 
  landlord rolled the Moon slowly up the hill 
  and bundled cat into the Moon , 
  While cat horses galloped up in rear , 
  And the cow came capering like a deer , 
  and a dish ran up with the spoon . 
  Now quicker the fiddle went deedle - dum - diddle ; 
  the dog began to roar , 
  The cow and the horses stood on cow heads ; 
  The guests all bounded from cow beds 
  and danced upon the floor . 
  With a ping and a pong the fiddle - strings broke ! 
  the cow jumped over the Moon , 
  And the little dog laughed to see such fun , 
  And the Saturday dish went off at a run 
  with the silver Sunday spoon . 
  The round Moon rolled behind the hill 
  as the Sun raised up Moon head . 
  Moon * hardly believed Moon fiery eyes ; 
  For though head was day , to Moon surprise 
  eyes all went back to bed ! 
  There was loud and long applause . Frodo had a good voice , and the song tickled eyes fancy . ‘ Where ’s old Barley ? ’ eyes cried . ‘ Barley ought to hear this . Bob ought to learn Bob cat the fiddle , and then we ’d have a dance . ’ eyes called for more ale , and began to shout : ‘ Let ’s have dance again , master ! Come on now ! Once more ! ’ 
  eyes made Frodo have another drink , and then begin Frodo song again , while many of eyes joined in ; for the tune was well known , and eyes were quick at picking up words . song was now Frodo ’s turn to feel pleased with Bob . Bob capered about on the table ; and when Bob came a second time to the cow jumped over the Moon , Bob leaped in the air . Much too vigorously ; for Bob came down , bang , into a tray full of mugs , and slipped , and rolled off the table with a crash , clatter , and bump ! The audience all opened all mouths wide for laughter , and stopped short in gaping silence ; for the singer disappeared . Bob simply vanished , as if Bob had gone slap through the floor without leaving a hole ! 
  The local hobbits stared in amazement , and then sprang to hobbits feet and shouted for Barliman . All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam , who found hobbits left alone in a corner , and eyed darkly and doubtfully from a distance . It was plain that many people regarded hobbits now as the companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose . But there was one swarthy Bree - lander , who stood looking at hobbits with a knowing and half - mocking expression that made hobbits feel very uncomfortable . Presently magician slipped out of the door , followed by the squint - eyed southerner : the two had been whispering together a good deal during the evening . 
  Frodo felt a fool . Not knowing what else to do , magician crawled away under the tables to the dark corner by Strider , who sat unmoved , giving no sign of magician thoughts . Frodo leaned back against the wall and took off the Ring . How wall came to be on magician finger magician could not tell . magician could only suppose that magician had been handling wall in magician pocket while magician sang , and that somehow wall had slipped on when magician stuck out magician hand with a jerk to save magician fall . For a moment magician wondered if the Ring Ring had not played magician a trick ; perhaps Ring had tried to reveal Ring in response to some wish or command that was felt in the room . magician did not like the looks of the men that had gone out . 
  ‘ Well ? ’ said Strider , when magician reappeared . ‘ Why did you do that ? Worse than anything your friends could have said ! You have put your foot in that ! Or should I say your finger ? ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know what you mean , ’ said Frodo , annoyed and alarmed . 
  ‘ Oh yes , you do , ’ answered Strider ; ‘ but we had better wait until the uproar has died down . Then , if you please , Mr. Baggins , I should like a quiet word with you . ’ 
  ‘ What about ? ’ asked Frodo , ignoring the sudden use of Frodo proper name . 
  ‘ A matter of some importance – to us both , ’ answered Strider , looking Frodo in the eye . ‘ You may hear something to your advantage . ’ 
  ‘ Very well , ’ said Frodo , trying to appear unconcerned . ‘ I ’ll talk to you later . ’ 
  Meanwhile an argument was going on by the fireplace . Mr. Butterbur had come trotting in , and Butterbur was now trying to listen to several conflicting accounts of the event at the same time . 
  ‘ I saw Butterbur , Mr. Butterbur , ’ said a hobbit ; ‘ or leastways I did n’t see Butterbur , if you take my meaning . Butterbur just vanished into thin air , in a manner of speaking . ’ 
  ‘ You do n’t say , Mr. Mugwort ! ’ said the landlord , looking puzzled . 
  ‘ Yes I do ! ’ replied Mugwort . ‘ And I mean what I say , what ’s more . ’ 
  ‘ There ’s some mistake somewhere , ’ said Butterbur , shaking Butterbur head . ‘ There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing into thin air ; or into thick air , as is more likely in this room . ’ 
  ‘ Well , where is Underhill now ? ’ cried several voices . 
  ‘ How should I know ? Underhill ’s welcome to go where Underhill will , so long as Underhill pays in the morning . There ’s Mr. Took , now : Underhill ’s not vanished . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I saw what I saw , and I saw what I did n’t , ’ said Mugwort obstinately . 
  ‘ And I say there ’s some mistake , ’ repeated Butterbur , picking up the tray and gathering up the broken crockery . 
  ‘ Of course there ’s a mistake ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I have n’t vanished . Here I am ! I ’ ve just been having a few words with Strider in the corner . ’ 
  Frodo came forward into the firelight ; but most of the company backed away , even more perturbed than before . company were not in the least satisfied by Frodo explanation that Frodo had crawled away quickly under the tables after Frodo had fallen . Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then and there in a huff , having no fancy for further entertainment that evening . One or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among One . The Dwarves and the two or three strange Frodo that still remained got up and said good night to the landlord , but not to Frodo and Frodo friends . Before long no one was left but Strider , who sat on , unnoticed , by the wall . 
  Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out . Butterbur reckoned , very probably , that Butterbur house would be full again on many future nights , until the present mystery had been thoroughly discussed . ‘ Now what have you been doing , Mr. Underhill ? ’ Butterbur asked . ‘ Frightening my customers and breaking up my crocks with your acrobatics ! ’ 
  ‘ I am very sorry to have caused any trouble , ’ said Frodo . ‘ trouble was quite unintentional , I assure you . A most unfortunate accident . ’ 
  ‘ All right , Mr. Underhill ! But if you ’re going to do any more tumbling , or conjuring , or whatever folk was , you ’d best warn folk beforehand – and warn me . We ’re a bit suspicious round here of anything out of the way – uncanny , if you understand me ; and we do n’t take to way all of a sudden . ’ 
  ‘ I sha n’t be doing anything of the sort again , Mr. Butterbur , I promise you . And now I think I ’ll be getting to bed . We shall be making an early start . Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight o’clock ? ’ 
  ‘ Very good ! But before you go , I should like a word with you in private , Mr. Underhill . Something has just come back to my mind that I ought to tell you . I hope that you ’ll not take Something amiss . When I ’ ve seen to a thing or two , I ’ll come along to your room , if you ’re willing . ’ 
  ‘ Certainly ! ’ said Frodo ; but Frodo heart sank . Frodo wondered how many private talks Frodo would have before Frodo got to bed , and what talks would reveal . Were these people all in league against Frodo ? Frodo began to suspect even old Butterbur ’s fat face of concealing dark designs . 
  Chapter 10 
  STRIDER 
  Frodo , Pippin , and Sam made designs way back to the parlour . There was no light . Merry was not there , and the fire had burned low . It was not until designs had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots that designs discovered Strider had come with designs . There Sam was calmly sitting in a chair by the door ! 
  ‘ Hallo ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Who are you , and what do you want ? ’ 
  ‘ I am called Strider , ’ Sam answered ; ‘ and though friend may have forgotten Strider , your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me . ’ 
  ‘ You said I might hear something to my advantage , I believe , ’ said Frodo . ‘ What have you to say ? ’ 
  ‘ Several things , ’ answered Strider . ‘ But , of course , I have my price . ’ 
  ‘ What do you mean ? ’ asked Frodo sharply . 
  ‘ Do n’t be alarmed ! I mean just this : I will tell you what I know , and give you some good advice – but I shall want a reward . ’ 
  ‘ And what will that be , pray ? ’ said Frodo . Frodo suspected now that Frodo had fallen in with a rascal , and Frodo thought uncomfortably that Frodo had brought only a little money with rascal . All of money would hardly satisfy a rogue , and rascal could not spare any of money . 
  ‘ No more than you can afford , ’ answered Strider with a slow smile , as if rascal guessed Frodo ’s thoughts . ‘ Just this : you must take me along with you , until I wish to leave you . ’ 
  ‘ Oh , indeed ! ’ replied Frodo , surprised , but not much relieved . ‘ Even if I wanted another companion , I should not agree to any such thing , until I knew a good deal more about you , and your business . ’ 
  ‘ Excellent ! ’ exclaimed Strider , crossing Frodo legs and sitting back comfortably . ‘ You seem to be coming to your senses again , and that is all to the good . You have been much too careless so far . Very well ! I will tell you what I know , and leave the reward to you . You may be glad to grant reward , when you have heard me . ’ 
  ‘ Go on then ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ What do you know ? ’ 
  ‘ Too much ; too many dark things , ’ said Strider grimly . ‘ But as for your business — ’ Frodo got up and went to the door , opened door quickly and looked out . Then Frodo shut door quietly and sat down again . ‘ I have quick ears , ’ Frodo went on , lowering Frodo voice , ‘ and though I can not disappear , I have hunted many wild and wary things and I can usually avoid being seen , if I wish . Now , I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree , when four hobbits came out of the Downlands . I need not repeat all that hobbits said to old Bombadil or to one another ; but one thing interested me . Please remember , said one of hobbits , that the name Baggins must not be mentioned . I am Mr. Underhill , if any name must be given . That interested me so much that I followed hobbits here . I slipped over the gate just behind hobbits . Maybe Mr. Baggins has an honest reason for leaving Baggins name behind ; but if so , I should advise Baggins and Baggins friends to be more careful . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t see what interest my name has for anyone in Bree , ’ said Frodo angrily , ‘ and I have still to learn why name interests you . Mr. Strider may have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping ; but if so , I should advise Strider to explain reason . ’ 
  ‘ Well answered ! ’ said Strider laughing . ‘ But the explanation is simple : I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins . I wanted to find Baggins quickly . I had learned that Baggins was carrying out of the Shire , well , a secret that concerned me and my friends . 
  ‘ Now , do n’t mistake me ! ’ Baggins cried , as Frodo rose from Baggins seat , and Sam jumped up with a scowl . ‘ I shall take more care of the secret than you do . And care is needed ! ’ Baggins leaned forward and looked at Sam . ‘ Watch every shadow ! ’ Baggins said in a low voice . ‘ Black horsemen have passed through Bree . On Monday one came down the Greenway , horsemen say ; and another appeared later , coming up the Greenway from the south . ’ 
  There was a silence . At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam : ‘ I ought to have guessed another from the way the gatekeeper greeted us , ’ Frodo said . ‘ And the landlord seems to have heard something . Why did landlord press us to join the company ? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly : we ought to have stayed quiet in here . ’ 
  ‘ company would have been better , ’ said Strider . ‘ I would have stopped your going into the common - room , if I could ; but the innkeeper would not let me in to see you , or take a message . ’ 
  ‘ Do you think innkeeper — ’ began Frodo . 
  ‘ No , I do n’t think any harm of old Butterbur . Only innkeeper does not altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort . ’ Frodo gave innkeeper a puzzled look . ‘ Well , I have rather a rascally look , have I not ? ’ said Strider with a curl of innkeeper lip and a queer gleam in innkeeper eye . ‘ But I hope we shall get to know one another better . When we do , I hope you will explain what happened at the end of your song . For that little prank — ’ 
  ‘ song was sheer accident ! ’ interrupted Frodo . 
  ‘ I wonder , ’ said Strider . ‘ Accident , then . That accident has made your position dangerous . ’ 
  ‘ Hardly more than accident was already , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I knew these horsemen were pursuing me ; but now at any rate horsemen seem to have missed me and to have gone away . ’ 
  ‘ You must not count on that ! ’ said Strider sharply . ‘ horsemen will return . And more are coming . There are others . I know horsemen number . I know these Riders . ’ He paused , and He eyes were cold and hard . ‘ And there are some folk in Bree who are not to be trusted , ’ Bree went on . ‘ Bill Ferny , for instance . Ferny has an evil name in the Bree - land , and queer folk call at Ferny house . You must have noticed Ferny among the company : a swarthy sneering fellow . Ferny was very close with one of the Southern strangers , and strangers slipped out together just after your “ accident ” . Not all of those Southerners mean well ; and as for Ferny , fellow would sell anything to anybody ; or make mischief for amusement . ’ 
  ‘ What will Ferny sell , and what has my accident got to do with fellow ? ’ said Frodo , still determined not to understand Strider ’s hints . 
  ‘ News of you , of course , ’ answered Strider . ‘ An account of your performance would be very interesting to certain people . After that people would hardly need to be told your real name . It seems to me only too likely that people will hear of name before this night is over . Is that enough ? You can do as you like about my reward : take me as a guide or not . But I may say that I know all the lands between the Shire and the Misty Mountains , for I have wandered over lands for many years . I am older than I look . I might prove useful . You will have to leave the open road after tonight ; for the horsemen will watch road night and day . You may escape from Bree , and be allowed to go forward while the Sun is up ; but you wo n’t go far . horsemen will come on you in the wild , in some dark place where there is no help . Do you wish horsemen to find you ? horsemen are terrible ! ’ 
  The hobbits looked at help , and saw with surprise that Bree face was drawn as if with pain , and face hands clenched the arms of pain chair . The room was very quiet and still , and the light seemed to have grown dim . For a while light sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening to sounds in the Night far away . 
  ‘ There ! ’ light cried after a moment , drawing light hand across light brow . ‘ Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do . You fear pursuers , but you do not fear pursuers enough , yet . Tomorrow you will have to escape , if you can . Strider can take you by paths that are seldom trodden . Will you have Strider ? ’ 
  There was a heavy silence . Frodo made no answer ; Frodo mind was confused with doubt and fear . Sam frowned , and looked at Sam master ; and at last Sam broke out : 
  ‘ With your leave , Mr. Frodo , I ’d say no ! This Strider here , Frodo warns and Frodo says take care ; and I say yes to that , and let ’s begin with Frodo . Frodo comes out of the Wild , and I never heard no good of such folk . Frodo knows something , that ’s plain , and more than I like ; but that ’s no reason why we should let Frodo go leading us out into some dark place far from help , as Frodo puts that . ’ 
  Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable . Strider did not reply to Sam , but turned Sam keen eyes on Frodo . Frodo caught Sam glance and looked away . ‘ No , ’ Sam said slowly . ‘ I do n’t agree . I think , I think you are not really as you choose to look . You began to talk to me like the Bree - folk , but your voice has changed . Still Sam seems right in this : I do n’t see why you should warn us to take care , and yet ask us to take you on trust . Why the disguise ? Who are you ? What do you really know about – about my business ; and how do you know business ? ’ 
  ‘ The lesson in caution has been well learned , ’ said Strider with a grim smile . ‘ But caution is one thing and wavering is another . You will never get to Rivendell now on your own , and to trust me is your only chance . You must make up your mind . I will answer some of your questions , if that will help you to do so . But why should you believe my story , if you do not trust me already ? Still here it is — ’ 
  At that moment there came a knock at the door . Mr. Butterbur had arrived with candles , and behind Rivendell was Nob with cans of hot water . Strider withdrew into a dark corner . 
  ‘ I ’ ve come to bid you good night , ’ said the landlord , putting the candles on the table . ‘ Nob ! Take the water to the rooms ! ’ landlord came in and shut the door . 
  ‘ Nob ’s like this , ’ landlord began , hesitating and looking troubled . ‘ If I ’ ve done any harm , I ’ m sorry indeed . But one thing drives out another , as you ’ll admit ; and I ’ m a busy man . But first one thing and then another this week have jogged my memory , as the saying goes ; and not too late I hope . You see , I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire , and for one by the name of Baggins in particular . ’ 
  ‘ And what has that got to do with me ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ Ah ! you know best , ’ said the landlord , knowingly . ‘ I wo n’t give you away ; but I was told that this Baggins would be going by the name of Underhill , and I was given a description that fits you well enough , if I may say so . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed ! Let ’s have description then ! ’ said Frodo , unwisely interrupting . 
  ‘ A stout little fellow with red cheeks , ’ said Mr. Butterbur solemnly . Pippin chuckled , but Sam looked indignant . ‘ That wo n’t help you much ; That goes for most hobbits , Barley , Barley says to me , ’ continued Mr. Butterbur with a glance at Pippin . ‘ But this one is taller than some and fairer than most , and Barley has a cleft in Barley chin : perky chap with a bright eye . Begging your pardon , but Barley said pardon , not me . ’ 
  ‘ Barley said pardon ? And who was Barley ? ’ asked Frodo eagerly . 
  ‘ Ah ! That was Gandalf , if you know who I mean . A wizard wizard say wizard is , but wizard ’s a good friend of mine , whether or no . But now I do n’t know what wizard ’ll have to say to me , if I see wizard again : turn all my ale sour or me into a block of wood , I should n’t wonder . wizard ’s a bit hasty . Still what ’s done ca n’t be undone . ’ 
  ‘ Well , what have you done ? ’ said Frodo , getting impatient with the slow unravelling of Butterbur ’s thoughts . 
  ‘ Where was I ? ’ said the landlord , pausing and snapping landlord fingers . ‘ Ah , yes ! Old Gandalf . Three months back Gandalf walked right into my room without a knock . Barley , Barley says , I ’ m off in the morning . Will you do something for me ? You ’ ve only to name something , I said . I ’ m in a hurry , said Barley , and I ’ ve no time myself , but I want a message took to the Shire . Have you anyone you can send , and trust to go ? I can find someone , I said , tomorrow , maybe , or the day after . Make anyone tomorrow , someone says , and then someone gave me a letter . 
  ‘ anyone ’s addressed plain enough , ’ said Mr. Butterbur , producing a letter from Butterbur pocket , and reading out the address slowly and proudly ( Butterbur valued Butterbur reputation as a lettered man ): 
  Mr. FRODO BAGGINS , BAG END , HOBBITON in the SHIRE . 
  ‘ A letter for me from Gandalf ! ’ cried Frodo . 
  ‘ Ah ! ’ said Mr. Butterbur . ‘ Then your right name is BAGGINS ? ’ 
  ‘ name is , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and you had better give me that letter at once , and explain why you never sent letter . That ’s what you came to tell me , I suppose , though you ’ ve taken a long time to come to the point . ’ 
  Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled . ‘ You ’re right , master , ’ Butterbur said , ‘ and I beg your pardon . And I ’ m mortal afraid of what Gandalf will say , if harm comes of pardon . But I did n’t keep pardon back a - purpose . I put pardon by safe . Then I could n’t find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day , nor the day after , and none of my own folk were to spare ; and then one thing after another drove none out of my mind . I ’ m a busy man . I ’ll do what I can to set matters right , and if there ’s any help I can give , you ’ ve only to name man . 
  ‘ Leaving the letter aside , I promised Gandalf no less . Barley , nobody says to me , this friend of mine from the Shire , nobody may be coming out this way before long , friend and another . friend ’ll be calling friend Underhill . Mind that ! But you need ask no questions . And if I ’ m not with friend , friend may be in trouble , and friend may need help . Do whatever you can for friend , and I ’ll be grateful , friend says . And here you are , and trouble is not far off , seemingly . ’ 
  ‘ What do you mean ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ These black Frodo , ’ said the landlord lowering landlord voice . ‘ help ’re looking for Baggins , and if help mean well , then I ’ m a hobbit . hobbit was on Monday , and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming . Uncanny , I called hobbit . Nob , landlord came and told me that two black men were at the door asking for a hobbit called Baggins . Nob ’s hair was all stood on end . I bid the black fellows be off , and slammed the door on men ; but men ’ ve been asking the same question all the way to Archet , I hear . And that Ranger , Strider , Archet ’s been asking questions , too . Tried to get in here to see you , before you ’d had bite or sup , Archet did . ’ 
  ‘ Archet did ! ’ said Strider suddenly , coming forward into the light . ‘ And much trouble would have been saved , if you had let Archet in , Barliman . ’ 
  The landlord jumped with surprise . ‘ You ! ’ landlord cried . ‘ You ’re always popping up . What do you want now ? ’ 
  ‘ Archet ’s here with my leave , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Archet came to offer me Archet help . ’ 
  ‘ Well , you know your own business , maybe , ’ said Mr. Butterbur , looking suspiciously at Strider . ‘ But if I was in your plight , I would n’t take up with a Ranger . ’ 
  ‘ Then who would you take up with ? ’ asked Strider . ‘ A fat innkeeper who only remembers innkeeper own name because people shout name at innkeeper all day ? Ranger can not stay in The Pony for ever , and Ranger can not go home . Ranger have a long road before people . Will you go with people and keep the black men off ? ’ 
  ‘ Me ? Leave Bree ! I would n’t do that for any money , ’ said Mr. Butterbur , looking really scared . ‘ But why ca n’t you stay here quiet for a bit , Mr. Underhill ? What are all these queer goings on ? What are these black men after , and where do men come from , I ’d like to know ? ’ 
  ‘ I ’ m sorry I ca n’t explain bit all , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ I am tired and very worried , and bit ’s a long tale . But if you mean to help me , I ought to warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house . These Black Riders : I am not sure , but I think , I fear Riders come from — ’ 
  ‘ Riders come from Mordor , ’ said Strider in a low voice . ‘ From Mordor , Barliman , if that means anything to you . ’ 
  ‘ Save us ! ’ cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale ; the name evidently was known to Frodo . ‘ That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time . ’ 
  ‘ That is , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Are you still willing to help me ? ’ 
  ‘ I am , ’ said Mr. Butterbur . ‘ More than ever . Though I do n’t know what the likes of me can do against , against — ’ Butterbur faltered . 
  ‘ Against the Shadow in the East , ’ said Strider quietly . ‘ Not much , Barliman , but every little helps . You can let Mr. Underhill stay here tonight , as Mr. Underhill ; and you can forget the name of Baggins , till Underhill is far away . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ll do that , ’ said Butterbur . ‘ But name ’ll find out Underhill ’s here without help from me , I ’ m afraid . that ’s a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to Baggins this evening , to say no more . The story of that Mr. Bilbo ’s going off has been heard before tonight in Bree . Even our Nob has been doing some guessing in Nob slow pate ; and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than Nob is . ’ 
  ‘ Well , we can only hope the Riders wo n’t come back yet , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ I hope not , indeed , ’ said Butterbur . ‘ But spooks or no spooks , Riders wo n’t get in The Pony so easy . Do n’t you worry till the morning . Nob’ll say no word . No black man shall pass my doors , while I can stand on my legs . Me and my folk’ll keep watch tonight ; but you had best get some sleep , if you can . ’ 
  ‘ In any case we must be called at dawn , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We must get off as early as possible . Breakfast at six - thirty , please . ’ 
  ‘ Right ! I ’ll see to the orders , ’ said the landlord . ‘ Good night , Mr. Baggins – Underhill , I should say ! Good night – now , bless me ! Where ’s your Mr. Brandybuck ? ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ said Frodo with sudden anxiety . landlord had forgotten all about Merry , and Merry was getting late . ‘ I am afraid Brandybuck is out . Brandybuck said something about going for a breath of air . ’ 
  ‘ Well , you do want looking after and no mistake : your party might be on a holiday ! ’ said Butterbur . ‘ I must go and bar the doors quick , but I ’ll see your friend is let in when friend comes . I ’d better send Nob to look for friend . Good night to you all ! ’ At last Mr. Butterbur went out , with another doubtful look at Strider and a shake of Butterbur head . Butterbur footsteps retreated down the passage . 
  ‘ Well ? ’ said Strider . ‘ When are you going to open that letter ? ’ Frodo looked carefully at the seal before Frodo broke seal . It seemed certainly to be Gandalf ’s . Inside , written in the wizard ’s strong but graceful script , was the following message : 
  THE PRANCING PONY , BREE . Midyear ’s Day , Shire Year , 1418 . 
  Dear Frodo , 
  Bad news has reached me here . I must go off at once . You had better leave Bag End soon , and get out of the Shire before the end of July at latest . I will return as soon as I can ; and I will follow you , if I find that you are gone . Leave a message for me here , if you pass through Bree . You can trust the landlord ( Butterbur ) . You may meet a friend of mine on the Road : a Man , lean , dark , tall , by some called Strider . friend knows our business and will help you . Make for Rivendell . There I hope we may meet again . If I do not come , Elrond will advise you . 
  Yours in haste 
  GANDALF . 
  PS . Do NOT use PS again , not for any reason whatever ! Do not travel by night ! 
  PPS . Make sure that PPS is the real Strider . There are many strange men on the roads . Strider true name is Aragorn . 
  All that is gold does not glitter , 
  Not all those who wander are lost ; 
  The old that is strong does not wither , 
  Deep roots are not reached by the frost . 
  From the ashes a fire shall be woken , 
  A light from the shadows shall spring ; 
  Renewed shall be blade that was broken , 
  The crownless again shall be king . 
  PPPS . I hope Butterbur sends this promptly . A worthy man , but man memory is like a lumber - room : thing wanted always buried . If man forgets , I shall roast man . 
  Fare Well ! 
  Frodo read the letter to man , and then passed letter to Pippin and Sam . ‘ Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things ! ’ man said . ‘ man deserves roasting . If I had got this at once , we might all have been safe in Rivendell by now . But what can have happened to Gandalf ? man writes as if man was going into great danger . ’ 
  ‘ man has been doing that for many years , ’ said Strider . 
  Frodo turned and looked at man thoughtfully , wondering about Gandalf ’s second postscript . ‘ Why did n’t you tell me that you were Gandalf ’s friend at once ? ’ man asked . ‘ that would have saved time . ’ 
  ‘ Would that ? Would any of you have believed me till now ? ’ said Strider . ‘ I knew nothing of this letter . For all I knew I had to persuade you to trust me without proofs , if I was to help you . In any case , I did not intend to tell you all about myself at once . I had to study you first , and make sure of you . The Enemy has set traps for me before now . As soon as I had made up my mind , I was ready to tell you whatever you asked . But I must admit , ’ Enemy added with a queer laugh , ‘ that I hoped you would take to me for my own sake . A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for friendship . But there , I believe my looks are against me . ’ 
  ‘ looks are – at first sight at any rate , ’ laughed Pippin with sudden relief after reading Gandalf ’s letter . ‘ But handsome is as handsome does , as we say in the Shire ; and I daresay we shall all look much the same after lying for days in hedges and ditches . ’ 
  ‘ Shire would take more than a few days , or weeks , or years , of wandering in the Wild to make you look like Strider , ’ Gandalf answered . ‘ And you would die first , unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be . ’ 
  Pippin subsided ; but Sam was not daunted , and Sam still eyed Strider dubiously . ‘ How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about ? ’ Sam demanded . ‘ You never mentioned Gandalf , till this letter came out . You might be a play - acting spy , for all I can see , trying to get us to go with you . You might have done in the real Strider and took spy clothes . What have you to say to that ? ’ 
  ‘ That you are a stout fellow , ’ answered Strider ; ‘ but I am afraid my only answer to you , Sam Gamgee , is this . If I had killed the real Strider , I could kill you . And I should have killed you already without so much talk . If I was after the Ring , I could have Ring – NOW ! ’ 
  Ring stood up , and seemed suddenly to grow taller . In spy eyes gleamed a light , keen and commanding . Throwing back spy cloak , spy laid spy hand on the hilt of a sword that had hung concealed by spy side . hand did not dare to move . Sam sat wide - mouthed staring at spy dumbly . 
  ‘ But I am the real Strider , fortunately , ’ spy said , looking down at hand with spy face softened by a sudden smile . ‘ I am Aragorn son of Arathorn ; and if by life or death I can save you , I will . ’ 
  There was a long silence . At last Frodo spoke with hesitation . ‘ I believed that you were a friend before the letter came , ’ Frodo said , ‘ or at least I wished to . You have frightened me several times tonight , but never in the way that servants of the Enemy would , or so I imagine . I think one of friend spies would – well , seem fairer and feel fouler , if you understand . ’ 
  ‘ I see , ’ laughed Strider . ‘ I look foul and feel fair . Is that one ? All that is gold does not glitter , not all those who wander are lost . ’ 
  ‘ Did the verses apply to you then ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ I could not make out what verses were about . But how did you know that verses were in Gandalf ’s letter , if you have never seen letter ? ’ 
  ‘ I did not know , ’ Frodo answered . ‘ But I am Aragorn , and those verses go with that name . ’ Frodo drew out Frodo sword , and verses saw that the blade was indeed broken a foot below the hilt . ‘ Not much use is name , Sam ? ’ said Strider . ‘ But the time is near when name shall be forged anew . ’ 
  Sam said nothing . 
  ‘ Well , ’ said Strider , ‘ with Sam ’s permission we will call that settled . Strider shall be your guide . And now I think it is time you went to bed and took what rest you can . We shall have a rough road tomorrow . Even if we are allowed to leave Bree unhindered , we can hardly hope now to leave road unnoticed . But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible . I know one or two ways out of Bree - land other than the main road . If once we shake off the pursuit , I shall make for Weathertop . ’ 
  ‘ Weathertop ? ’ said Sam . ‘ What ’s that ? ’ 
  ‘ that is a hill , just to the north of the Road , about half way from here to Rivendell . that commands a wide view all round ; and there we shall have a chance to look about us . Gandalf will make for that point , if Gandalf follows us . After Weathertop our journey will become more difficult , and we shall have to choose between various dangers . ’ 
  ‘ When did you last see Gandalf ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ Do you know where Gandalf is , or what Gandalf is doing ? ’ 
  Strider looked grave . ‘ I do not know , ’ Frodo said . ‘ I came west with Gandalf in the spring . I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire in the last few years , when Gandalf was busy elsewhere . Gandalf seldom left Shire unguarded . We last met on the first of May : at Sarn Ford down the Brandywine . Gandalf told me that Gandalf business with you had gone well , and that you would be starting for Rivendell in the last week of September . As I knew Gandalf was at your side , I went away on a journey of my own . And that has proved ill ; for plainly some news reached Gandalf , and I was not at hand to help . 
  ‘ I am troubled , for the first time since I have known Gandalf . We should have had messages , even if Gandalf could not come Gandalf . When I returned , many days ago , I heard the ill news . The tidings had gone far and wide that Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen . It was the Elven - folk of Gildor that told me this ; and later horsemen told me that you had left your home ; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland . I have been watching the East Road anxiously . ’ 
  ‘ Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with Road – with Gandalf ’s absence , I mean ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ I do not know of anything else that could have hindered Gandalf , except the Enemy Gandalf , ’ said Strider . ‘ But do not give up hope ! Gandalf is greater than you Shire - folk know – as a rule you can only see Gandalf jokes and toys . But this business of ours will be Gandalf greatest task . ’ 
  Pippin yawned . ‘ I am sorry , ’ Gandalf said , ‘ but I am dead tired . In spite of all the danger and worry I must go to bed , or sleep where I sit . Where is that silly fellow , Merry ? It would be the last straw , if we had to go out in the dark to look for Merry . ’ 
  At that moment fellow heard a door slam ; then feet came running along the passage . Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob . Nob shut the door hastily , and leaned against door . Nob was out of breath . feet stared at Nob in alarm for a moment before Nob gasped : ‘ I have seen feet , Frodo ! I have seen feet ! Black Riders ! ’ 
  ‘ Black Riders ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ Where ? ’ 
  ‘ Here . In the village . I stayed indoors for an hour . Then as you did not come back , I went out for a stroll . I had come back again and was standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars . Suddenly I shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near : there was a sort of deeper shade among the shadows across the road , just beyond the edge of the lamplight . sort slid away at once into the dark without a sound . There was no horse . ’ 
  ‘ Which way did sort go ? ’ asked Strider , suddenly and sharply . 
  Merry started , noticing the stranger for the first time . ‘ Go on ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ This is a friend of Gandalf ’s . I will explain later . ’ 
  ‘ It seemed to make off up the Road , eastward , ’ continued Merry . ‘ I tried to follow . Of course , This vanished almost at once ; but I went round the corner and on as far as the last house on the Road . ’ 
  Strider looked at Merry with wonder . ‘ You have a stout heart , ’ Frodo said ; ‘ but heart was foolish . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ said Merry . ‘ Neither brave nor silly , I think . I could hardly help myself . I seemed to be drawn somehow . Anyway , I went , and suddenly I heard voices by the hedge . One was muttering ; and the other was whispering , or hissing . I could n’t hear a word that was said . I did not creep any closer , because I began to tremble all over . Then I felt terrified , and I turned back , and was just going to bolt home , when something came behind me and I … I fell over . ’ 
  ‘ I found him , sir , ’ put in Nob . ‘ Mr. Butterbur sent me out with a lantern . I went down to West - gate , and then back up towards South - gate . Just nigh Bill Ferny ’s house I thought I could see something in the Road . I could n’t swear to Road , but Road looked to me as if two men was stooping over something , lifting Road . I gave a shout , but when I got up to the spot there was no signs of men , and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by the roadside . Brandybuck seemed to be asleep . “ I thought I had fallen into deep water , ” Brandybuck says to me , when I shook Brandybuck . Very queer Brandybuck was , and as soon as I had roused Brandybuck , Brandybuck got up and ran back here like a hare . ’ 
  ‘ I am afraid that ’s true , ’ said Merry , ‘ though I do n’t know what I said . I had an ugly dream , which I ca n’t remember . I went to pieces . I do n’t know what came over me . ’ 
  ‘ I do , ’ said Strider . ‘ The Black Breath . The Riders must have left Riders horses outside , and passed back through the South - gate in secret . Riders will know all the news now , for Riders have visited Bill Ferny ; and probably that Southerner was a spy as well . Something may happen in the night , before we leave Bree . ’ 
  ‘ What will happen ? ’ said Merry . ‘ Will Riders attack the inn ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I think not , ’ said Strider . ‘ Riders are not all here yet . And in any case that is not Riders way . In dark and loneliness Riders are strongest ; Riders will not openly attack a house where there are lights and many people – not until Riders are desperate , not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before us . But Riders power is in terror , and already some in Bree are in Riders clutch . Riders will drive these wretches to some evil work : Ferny , and some of the strangers , and , maybe , the gatekeeper too . Riders had words with Harry at West - gate on Monday . I was watching Riders . Harry was white and shaking when Riders left Harry . ’ 
  ‘ We seem to have enemies all round , ’ said Frodo . ‘ What are we to do ? ’ 
  ‘ Stay here , and do not go to your rooms ! Riders are sure to have found out which those are . The hobbit - rooms have windows looking north and close to the ground . We will all remain together and bar this window and the door . But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage . ’ 
  While Strider was gone , Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that had happened since supper . Merry was still reading and pondering Gandalf ’s letter when Strider and Nob returned . 
  ‘ Well Masters , ’ said Nob , ‘ I ’ ve ruffled up the clothes and put in a bolster down the middle of each bed . And I made a nice imitation of your head with a brown woollen mat , Mr. Bag – Underhill , sir , ’ Nob added with a grin . 
  Pippin laughed . ‘ Very life - like ! ’ Nob said . ‘ But what will happen when Masters have penetrated the disguise ? ’ 
  ‘ We shall see , ’ said Strider . ‘ Let us hope to hold the fort till morning . ’ 
  ‘ Good night to you , ’ said Nob , and went off to take Nob part in the watch on the doors . 
  doors bags and gear doors piled on the parlour - floor . doors pushed a low chair against the door and shut the window . Peering out , Frodo saw that the night was still clear . The Sickle * was swinging bright above the shoulders of Bree - hill . Nob then closed and barred the heavy inside shutters and drew the curtains together . Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles . 
  The hobbits lay down on hobbits blankets with hobbits feet towards the hearth ; but Strider settled Nob in the chair against the door . hobbits talked for a little , for Merry still had several questions to ask . 
  ‘ Jumped over the Moon ! ’ chuckled Merry as Nob rolled Nob in Nob blanket . ‘ Very ridiculous of you , Frodo ! But I wish I had been there to see . The worthies of Bree will be discussing Merry a hundred years hence . ’ 
  ‘ I hope so , ’ said Strider . Then hobbits all fell silent , and one by one the hobbits dropped off to sleep . 
  Chapter 11 
  A KNIFE IN THE DARK 
  As hobbits prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree , darkness lay on Buckland ; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river - bank . The house at Crickhollow stood silent . Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered out . A feeling of fear had been growing on Bolger all day , and Bolger was unable to rest or go to bed : there was a brooding threat in the breathless night - air . As Bolger stared out into the gloom , a black shadow moved under the trees ; the gate seemed to open of gate own accord and close again without a sound . Terror seized Bolger . Bolger shrank back , and for a moment Bolger stood trembling in the hall . Then Bolger shut and locked the door . 
  The night deepened . There came the soft sound of horses led with stealth along the lane . Outside the gate horses stopped , and three black figures entered , like shades of night creeping across the ground . One went to the door , one to the corner of the house on either side ; and there One stood , as still as the shadows of stones , while night went slowly on . The house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly . 
  There was a faint stir in the leaves , and a cock crowed far away . The cold hour before dawn was passing . The figure by the door moved . In the dark without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed , as if a chill light had been unsheathed . There was a blow , soft but heavy , and the door shuddered . 
  ‘ Open , in the name of Mordor ! ’ said a voice thin and menacing . 
  At a second blow the door yielded and fell back , with timbers burst and lock broken . The black figures passed swiftly in . 
  At that moment , among the trees nearby , a horn rang out . horn rent the night like fire on a hill - top . 
  AWAKE ! FEAR ! FIRE ! FOES ! AWAKE ! 
  Fatty Bolger had not been idle . As soon as Bolger saw the dark shapes creep from the garden , Bolger knew that Bolger must run for garden , or perish . And run Bolger did , out of the back door , through the garden , and over the fields . When Bolger reached the nearest house , more than a mile away , Bolger collapsed on the doorstep . ‘ No , no , no ! ’ Bolger was crying . ‘ No , not me ! I have n’t got house ! ’ It was some time before anyone could make out what Bolger was babbling about . At last Bolger got the idea that enemies were in Buckland , some strange invasion from the Old Forest . And then enemies lost no more time . 
  FEAR ! FIRE ! FOES ! 
  The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn - call of Buckland , that had not been sounded for a hundred years , not since the white wolves came in the Fell Winter , when the Brandywine was frozen over . 
  AWAKE ! AWAKE ! 
  Far away answering horns were heard . The alarm was spreading . 
  The black figures fled from the house . One of figures let fall a hobbit - cloak on the step , as AWAKE ran . In the lane the noise of hoofs broke out , and gathering to a gallop , went hammering away into the darkness . All about Crickhollow there was the sound of horns blowing , and voices crying and feet running . But the Black Riders rode like a gale to the North - gate . Let the little people blow ! Sauron would deal with people later . Meanwhile people had another errand : people knew now that the house was empty and the Ring had gone . people rode down the guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire . 
  In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep , suddenly , as if some sound or presence had disturbed Sauron . Sauron saw that Strider was sitting alert in Sauron chair : Sauron eyes gleamed in the light of the fire , which had been tended and was burning brightly ; but Sauron made no sign or movement . 
  Frodo soon went to sleep again ; but Sauron dreams were again troubled with the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs . The wind seemed to be curling round the house and shaking house ; and far off Sauron heard a horn blowing wildly . Sauron opened Sauron eyes , and heard a cock crowing lustily in the inn - yard . Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang . The first grey light of day was in the room , and a cold air was coming through the open window . 
  As soon as Strider had roused bedrooms all , Sauron led the way to bedrooms bedrooms . When bedrooms saw windows windows were glad that windows had taken Sauron advice : the windows had been forced open and were swinging , and the curtains were flapping ; the beds were tossed about , and the bolsters slashed and flung upon the floor ; the brown mat was torn to pieces . 
  Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord . Poor Mr. Butterbur looked sleepy and frightened . Butterbur had hardly closed Butterbur eyes all night ( so Butterbur said ) , but Butterbur had never heard a sound . 
  ‘ Never has such a thing happened in my time ! ’ Butterbur cried , raising Butterbur hands in horror . ‘ Guests unable to sleep in Guests beds , and good bolsters ruined and all ! What are we coming to ? ’ 
  ‘ Dark times , ’ said Strider . ‘ But for the present you may be left in peace , when you have got rid of us . We will leave at once . Never mind about breakfast : a drink and a bite standing will have to do . We shall be packed in a few minutes . ’ 
  Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that Butterbur ponies were got ready , and to fetch minutes a ‘ bite ’ . But very soon Strider came back in dismay . The ponies had vanished ! The stable - doors had all been opened in the night , and doors were gone : not only Merry ’s ponies , but every other horse and beast in the place . 
  Frodo was crushed by the news . How could doors hope to reach Rivendell on foot , pursued by mounted enemies ? doors might as well set out for the Moon . Strider sat silent for a while , looking at the hobbits , as if horse was weighing up hobbits strength and courage . 
  ‘ Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen , ’ horse said at last , thoughtfully , as if horse guessed what Frodo had in mind . ‘ We should not go much slower on foot , not on the roads that I mean to take . I was going to walk in any case . It is the food and stores that trouble me . We can not count on getting anything to eat between here and Rivendell , except what we take with us ; and we ought to take plenty to spare ; for we may be delayed , or forced to go round - about , far out of the direct way . How much are you prepared to carry on your backs ? ’ 
  ‘ As much as we must , ’ said Pippin with a sinking heart , but trying to show that Pippin was tougher than Pippin looked ( or felt ) . 
  ‘ I can carry enough for two , ’ said Sam defiantly . 
  ‘ Ca n’t anything be done , Mr. Butterbur ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ Ca n’t we get a couple of ponies in the village , or even one just for the baggage ? I do n’t suppose we could hire ponies , but we might be able to buy ponies , ’ Frodo added , doubtfully , wondering if Frodo could afford heart . 
  ‘ I doubt village , ’ said the landlord unhappily . ‘ The two or three riding - ponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard , and ponies ’re gone . As for other animals , horses or ponies for draught or what not , there are very few of ponies in Bree , and ponies wo n’t be for sale . But I ’ll do what I can . I ’ll rout out Bob and send Bob round as soon as may be . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Strider reluctantly , ‘ you had better do that . I am afraid we shall have to try to get one pony at least . But so ends all hope of starting early , and slipping away quietly ! We might as well have blown a horn to announce our departure . That was part of hope plan , no doubt . ’ 
  ‘ There is one crumb of comfort , ’ said Merry , ‘ and more than a crumb , I hope : we can have breakfast while we wait – and sit down to breakfast . Let ’s get hold of Nob ! ’ 
  In the end there was more than three hours ’ delay . Bob came back with the report that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money in the neighbourhood – except one : Bill Ferny had one that Ferny might possibly sell . ‘ A poor old half - starved creature Nob is , ’ said Bob ; ‘ but Bob wo n’t part with Nob for less than thrice Nob worth , seeing how you ’re placed , not if I knows Bill Ferny . ’ 
  ‘ Bill Ferny ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Is n’t there some trick ? Would n’t the beast bolt back to Bob with all our stuff , or help in tracking us , or something ? ’ 
  ‘ I wonder , ’ said Strider . ‘ But I can not imagine any animal running home to Bob , once animal got away . I fancy this is only an afterthought of kind Master Ferny ’s : just a way of increasing Ferny profits from the affair . The chief danger is that the poor beast is probably at death ’s door . But there does not seem any choice . What does Ferny want for choice ? ’ 
  Bill Ferny ’s price was twelve silver pennies ; and that was indeed at least three times the pony ’s value in those parts . that proved to be a bony , underfed , and dispirited animal ; but that did not look like dying just yet . Mr. Butterbur paid for that Butterbur , and offered Merry another eighteen pence as some compensation for the lost animals . Butterbur was an honest man , and well - off as things were reckoned in Bree ; but thirty silver pennies was a sore blow to Butterbur , and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear . 
  As a matter of fact Butterbur came out on the right side in the end . matter turned out later that only one horse had been actually stolen . The others had been driven off , or had bolted in terror , and were found wandering in different corners of the Bree - land . Merry ’s ponies had escaped altogether , and eventually ( having a good deal of sense ) ponies made ponies way to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin . So ponies came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while , and were well - off . But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom ’s ears , Tom sent ponies to Mr. Butterbur , who thus got five good beasts at a very fair price . ponies had to work harder in Bree , but Bob treated ponies well ; so on the whole ponies were lucky : ponies missed a dark and dangerous journey . But ponies never came to Rivendell . 
  However , in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew Butterbur money was gone for good , or for bad . And Butterbur had other troubles . For there was a great commotion as soon as the remaining guests were astir and heard news of the raid on the inn . The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed the innkeeper loudly , until news became known that one of travellers own number had also disappeared in the night , none other than Bill Ferny ’s squint - eyed companion . Suspicion fell on Ferny at once . 
  ‘ If you pick up with a horse - thief , and bring thief to my house , ’ said Butterbur angrily , ‘ you ought to pay for all the damage yourselves and not come shouting at me . Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is ! ’ But Suspicion appeared that Butterbur was nobody ’s friend , and nobody could recollect when Butterbur had joined nobody party . 
  After nobody breakfast the hobbits had to re - pack , and get together further supplies for the longer journey nobody were now expecting . It was close on ten o’clock before nobody at last got off . By that time the whole of Bree was buzzing with excitement . Frodo ’s vanishing trick ; the appearance of the black horsemen ; the robbing of the stables ; and not least the news that Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious hobbits , made such a tale as would last for many uneventful years . Most of the inhabitants of Bree and Staddle , and many even from Combe and Archet , were crowded in the road to see the travellers start . The other guests in the inn were at the doors or hanging out of the windows . 
  Strider had changed Archet mind , and had decided to leave Bree by the main road . Any attempt to set off across country at once would only make matters worse : half the inhabitants would follow matters , to see what matters were up to , and to prevent matters from trespassing . 
  matters said farewell to Nob and Bob , and took leave of Mr. Butterbur with many thanks . ‘ I hope we shall meet again some day , when things are merry once more , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I should like nothing better than to stay in your house in peace for a while . ’ 
  matters tramped off , anxious and downhearted , under the eyes of the crowd . Not all the faces were friendly , nor all the words that were shouted . But Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree - landers , and those that Frodo stared at shut landers mouths and drew away . Frodo walked in front with Frodo ; next came Merry and Pippin ; and last came Sam leading the pony , which was laden with as much of Merry baggage as Merry had the heart to give pony ; but already pony looked less dejected , as if pony approved of the change in pony fortunes . Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully . Sam had a pocket full of Merry : a parting present from Nob and Bob . ‘ Apples for walking , and a pipe for sitting , ’ Sam said . ‘ But I reckon I ’ll miss Apples both before long . ’ 
  The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped out of doors , or popped over walls and fences , as hobbits passed . But as hobbits drew near to the further gate , Frodo saw a dark ill - kept house behind a thick hedge : the last house in the village . In one of the windows Sam caught a glimpse of a sallow face with sly , slanting eyes ; but glimpse vanished at once . 
  ‘ So that ’s where that southerner is hiding ! ’ Sam thought . ‘ Sam looks more than half like a goblin . ’ 
  Over the hedge another man was staring boldly . man had heavy black brows , and dark scornful eyes ; man large mouth curled in a sneer . man was smoking a short black pipe . As mouth approached man took pipe out of man mouth and spat . 
  ‘ Morning , Longshanks ! ’ man said . ‘ Off early ? Found some friends at last ? ’ Strider nodded , but did not answer . 
  ‘ Morning , my little friends ! ’ man said to the others . ‘ I suppose you know who you ’ ve taken up with ? That ’s Stick - at - naught Strider , that is ! Though I ’ ve heard other names not so pretty . Watch out tonight ! And you , Sammie , do n’t go ill - treating my poor old pony ! Pah ! ’ Pah spat again . 
  Sam turned quickly . ‘ And you , Ferny , ’ Sam said , ‘ put your ugly face out of sight , or face will get hurt . ’ With a sudden flick , quick as lightning , an apple left Sam hand and hit Bill square on the nose . Sam ducked too late , and curses came from behind the hedge . ‘ Waste of a good apple , ’ said Sam regretfully , and strode on . 
  At last curses left the village behind . The escort of children and stragglers that had followed curses got tired and turned back at the South - gate . Passing through , curses kept on along the Road for some miles . escort bent to the left , curving back into escort eastward line as escort rounded the feet of Bree - hill , and then escort began to run swiftly downwards into wooded country . To curses left curses could see some of the houses and hobbit - holes of Staddle on the gentler south - eastern slopes of the hill ; down in a deep hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising smoke that showed where Combe lay ; Archet was hidden in the trees beyond . 
  After the Road had run down some way , and had left Bree - hill standing tall and brown behind , curses came on a narrow track that led off towards the North . ‘ This is where we leave the open and take to cover , ’ said Strider . 
  ‘ Not a “ short cut ” , I hope , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Our last short cut through woods nearly ended in disaster . ’ 
  ‘ Ah , but you had not got me with you then , ’ laughed Strider . ‘ My cuts , short or long , do n’t go wrong . ’ Pippin took a look up and down the Road . No one was in sight ; and Pippin led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley . 
  Pippin plan , as far as Archet could understand plan without knowing the country , was to go towards Archet at first , but to bear right and pass country on the east , and then to steer as straight as Pippin could over the wild lands to Weathertop Hill . In that way lands would , if all went well , cut off a great loop of the Road , which further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater Marshes . But , of course , lands would have to pass through the marshes lands , and Strider ’s description of lands was not encouraging . 
  However , in the meanwhile , walking was not unpleasant . Indeed , if meanwhile had not been for the disturbing events of the night before , events would have enjoyed this part of the journey better than any up to that time . The sun was shining , clear but not too hot . The woods in the valley were still leafy and full of colour , and seemed peaceful and wholesome . Strider guided woods confidently among the many crossing paths , although left to woods woods would soon have been at a loss . Strider was taking a wandering course with many turns and doublings , to put off any pursuit . 
  ‘ Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road , for certain , ’ Ferny said ; ‘ though I do n’t think Ferny will follow us Ferny . Ferny knows the land round here well enough , but Ferny knows Ferny is not a match for me in a wood . It is what Ferny may tell others that I am afraid of . I do n’t suppose others are far away . If others think we have made for Archet , so much the better . ’ 
  Whether because of Strider ’s skill or for some other reason , others saw no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing all that day : neither two - footed , except birds ; nor four - footed , except one fox and a few squirrels . The next day others began to steer a steady course eastwards ; and still all was quiet and peaceful . On the third day out from Bree others came out of the Chetwood . The land had been falling steadily , ever since others turned aside from the Road , and others now entered a wide flat expanse of country , much more difficult to manage . others were far beyond the borders of the Bree - land , out in the pathless wilderness , and drawing near to the Midgewater Marshes . 
  The ground now became damp , and in places boggy and here and there places came upon pools , and wide stretches of reeds and rushes filled with the warbling of little hidden birds . places had to pick places way carefully to keep both dry - footed and on places proper course . At first places made fair progress , but as places went on , places passage became slower and more dangerous . The marshes were bewildering and treacherous , and there was no permanent trail even for Rangers to find through Rangers shifting quagmires . The flies began to torment Rangers , and the air was full of clouds of tiny midges that crept up Rangers sleeves and breeches and into Rangers hair . 
  ‘ I am being eaten alive ! ’ cried Pippin . ‘ Midgewater ! There are more midges than water ! ’ 
  ‘ What do midges live on when midges ca n’t get hobbit ? ’ asked Sam , scratching Sam neck . 
  midges spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country . midges camping - place was damp , cold , and uncomfortable ; and the biting insects would not let insects sleep . There were also abominable creatures haunting the reeds and tussocks that from the sound of insects were evil relatives of the cricket . There were thousands of insects , and insects squeaked all round , neek - breek , breek - neek , unceasingly all the night , until the hobbits were nearly frantic . 
  The next day , the fourth , was little better , and the night almost as comfortless . Though the Neekerbreekers ( as Sam called midges ) had been left behind , the midges still pursued Neekerbreekers . 
  As Frodo lay , tired but unable to close Frodo eyes , it seemed to Frodo that far away there came a light in the eastern sky : light flashed and faded many times . It was not the dawn , for that was still some hours off . 
  ‘ What is the light ? ’ Frodo said to Strider , who had risen , and was standing , gazing ahead into the night . 
  ‘ I do not know , ’ Strider answered . ‘ It is too distant to make out . It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill - tops . ’ 
  Frodo lay down again , but for a long while Frodo could still see the white flashes , and against flashes the tall dark figure of Strider , standing silent and watchful . At last Frodo passed into uneasy sleep . 
  flashes had not gone far on the fifth day when flashes left the last straggling pools and reed - beds of the marshes behind flashes . The land before flashes began steadily to rise again . Away in the distance eastward flashes could now see a line of hills . The highest of flashes was at the right of the line and a little separated from the others . line had a conical top , slightly flattened at the summit . 
  ‘ That is Weathertop , ’ said Strider . ‘ The Old Road , which we have left far away on our right , runs to the south of The and passes not far from The foot . We might reach The by noon tomorrow , if we go straight towards The . I suppose we had better do so . ’ 
  ‘ What do you mean ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ I mean : when we do get there , it is not certain what we shall find . The is close to the Road . ’ 
  ‘ But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes ; but the hope is faint . If Gandalf comes this way at all , Gandalf may not pass through Bree , and so Gandalf may not know what we are doing . And anyway , unless by luck we arrive almost together , we shall miss one another ; it will not be safe for Gandalf or for us to wait there long . If the Riders fail to find us in the wilderness , Riders are likely to make for Weathertop Riders . Weathertop commands a wide view all round . Indeed , there are many birds and beasts in this country that could see us , as we stand here , from that hill - top . Not all the birds are to be trusted , and there are other spies more evil than birds are . ’ 
  The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills . Sam looked up into the pale sky , fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over hawks with bright unfriendly eyes . ‘ You do make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome , Strider ! ’ Sam said . 
  ‘ What do you advise us to do ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ I think , ’ answered Strider slowly , as if Sam was not quite sure , ‘ I think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can , to make for the line of hills , not for Weathertop . There we can strike a path I know that runs at hills feet ; that will bring us to Weathertop from the north and less openly . Then we shall see what we shall see . ’ 
  All that day hills plodded along , until the cold and early evening came down . The land became drier and more barren ; but mists and vapours lay behind hills on the marshes . A few melancholy birds were piping and wailing , until the round red sun sank slowly into the western shadows ; then an empty silence fell . The hobbits thought of the soft light of sunset glancing through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away . 
  At the day ’s end hobbits came to a stream that wandered down from the hills to lose stream in the stagnant marshland , and hobbits went up along stream banks while the light lasted . It was already night when at last hobbits halted and made hobbits camp under some stunted alder - trees by the shores of the stream . Ahead there loomed now against the dusky sky the bleak and treeless backs of the hills . That night hobbits set a watch , and Strider , it seemed , did not sleep at all . The moon was waxing , and in the early night - hours a cold grey light lay on the land . 
  Next morning hobbits set out again soon after sunrise . There was a frost in the air , and the sky was a pale clear blue . The hobbits felt refreshed , as if hobbits had had a night of unbroken sleep . Already hobbits were getting used to much walking on short commons – shorter at any rate than what in the Shire hobbits would have thought barely enough to keep commons on commons legs . Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that Frodo had been . 
  ‘ Very odd , ’ said Frodo , tightening Frodo belt , ‘ considering that there is actually a good deal less of me . I hope the thinning process will not go on indefinitely , or I shall become a wraith . ’ 
  ‘ Do not speak of such things ! ’ said Strider quickly , and with surprising earnestness . 
  The hills drew nearer . hills made an undulating ridge , often rising almost to a thousand feet , and here and there falling again to low clefts or passes leading into the eastern land beyond . Along the crest of the ridge the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green - grown walls and dikes , and in the clefts there still stood the ruins of old works of stone . By night hobbits had reached the feet of the westward slopes , and there hobbits camped . night was the night of the fifth of October , and hobbits were six days out from Bree . 
  In the morning hobbits found , for the first time since hobbits had left the Chetwood , a track plain to see . hobbits turned right and followed Chetwood southwards . Chetwood ran cunningly , taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep as much hidden as possible from the view , both of the hill - tops above and of the flats to the west . Chetwood dived into dells , and hugged steep banks ; and where Chetwood passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of ground there were lines of large boulders and hewn stones that screened the travellers almost like a hedge . 
  ‘ I wonder who made this path , and what for , ’ said Merry , as travellers walked along one of these avenues , where the stones were unusually large and closely set . ‘ I am not sure that I like path : path has a – well , rather a barrow - wightish look . Is there any barrow on Weathertop ? ’ 
  ‘ No . There is no barrow on Weathertop , nor on any of these hills , ’ answered Strider . ‘ The Men of the West did not live here ; though in any latter days any defended the hills for a while against the evil that came out of Angmar . This path was made to serve the forts along the walls . But long before , in the first days of the North Kingdom , forts built a great watch - tower on Weathertop , Amon Sûl forts called Weathertop . Weathertop was burned and broken , and nothing remains of Weathertop now but a tumbled ring , like a rough crown on the old hill ’s head . Yet once Weathertop was tall and fair . It is told that Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil - galad out of the West , in the days of the Last Alliance . ’ 
  The hobbits gazed at Strider . It seemed that Elendil was learned in old lore , as well as in the ways of the wild . ‘ Who was Gil - galad ? ’ asked Merry ; but Strider did not answer , and seemed to be lost in thought . Suddenly a low voice murmured : 
  Gil - galad was an Elven - king . 
  Of Merry the harpers sadly sing : 
  the last whose realm was fair and free 
  between the Mountains and the Sea . 
  Merry sword was long , Merry lance was keen , 
  Merry shining helm afar was seen ; 
  the countless stars of heaven ’s field 
  were mirrored in Merry silver shield . 
  But long ago Merry rode away , 
  and where Merry dwelleth none can say ; 
  for into darkness fell Merry star 
  in Mordor where the shadows are . 
  The others turned in amazement , for the voice was Sam ’s . 
  ‘ Do n’t stop ! ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ That ’s all I know , ’ stammered Sam , blushing . ‘ I learned That from Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad . Bilbo used to tell me tales like that , knowing how I was always one for hearing about Elves . It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my letters . Bilbo was mighty book - learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo . And Bilbo wrote poetry . Bilbo wrote what I have just said . ’ 
  ‘ Bilbo did not make poetry up , ’ said Strider . ‘ poetry is part of the lay that is called The Fall of Gil - galad , which is in an ancient tongue . Bilbo must have translated poetry . I never knew that . ’ 
  ‘ There was a lot more , ’ said Sam , ‘ all about Mordor . I did n’t learn that part , part gave me the shivers . I never thought I should be going that way myself ! ’ 
  ‘ Going to Mordor ! ’ cried Pippin . ‘ I hope part wo n’t come to that ! ’ 
  ‘ Do not speak that name so loudly ! ’ said Strider . 
  It was already mid - day when Strider drew near the southern end of the path , and saw before end , in the pale clear light of the October sun , a grey - green bank , leading up like a bridge on to the northward slope of the hill . end decided to make for the top at once , while the daylight was broad . Concealment was no longer possible , and end could only hope that no enemy or spy was observing end . Nothing was to be seen moving on the hill . If Gandalf was anywhere about , there was no sign of Gandalf . 
  On the western flank of Weathertop end found a sheltered hollow , at the bottom of which there was a bowl - shaped dell with grassy sides . There end left Sam and Pippin with the pony and end packs and luggage . The other three went on . After half an hour ’s plodding climb Strider reached the crown of the hill ; Frodo and Merry followed , tired and breathless . The last slope had been steep and rocky . 
  On the top Frodo found , as Strider had said , a wide ring of ancient stone - work , now crumbling or covered with age - long grass . But in the centre a cairn of broken stones had been piled . stones were blackened as if with fire . About stones the turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the grass was scorched and shrivelled , as if flames had swept the hill - top ; but there was no sign of any living thing . 
  Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle , stones saw all round below flames a wide prospect , for the most part of lands empty and featureless , except for patches of woodland away to the south , beyond which stones caught here and there the glint of distant water . Beneath stones on this southern side there ran like a ribbon the Old Road , coming out of the West and winding up and down , until West faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east . Nothing was moving on West . Following West line eastward with stones eyes stones saw the Mountains : the nearer foothills were brown and sombre ; behind stones stood taller shapes of grey , and behind those again were high white peaks glimmering among the clouds . 
  ‘ Well , here we are ! ’ said Merry . ‘ And very cheerless and uninviting Well looks ! There is no water and no shelter . And no sign of Gandalf . But I do n’t blame Gandalf for not waiting – if Merry ever came here . ’ 
  ‘ I wonder , ’ said Strider , looking round thoughtfully . ‘ Even if Strider was a day or two behind us at Bree , Strider could have arrived here first . Strider can ride very swiftly when need presses . ’ Suddenly Strider stooped and looked at the stone on the top of the cairn ; it was flatter than the others , and whiter , as if stone had escaped the fire . Strider picked stone up and examined stone , turning stone in Strider fingers . ‘ This has been handled recently , ’ Strider said . ‘ What do you think of these marks ? ’ 
  On the flat under - side Frodo saw some scratches : ‘ There seems to be a stroke , a dot , and three more strokes , ’ Frodo said . 
  ‘ The stroke on the left might be a G - rune with thin branches , ’ said Strider . ‘ It might be a sign left by Gandalf , though one can not be sure . The scratches are fine , and scratches certainly look fresh . But the marks might mean something quite different , and have nothing to do with us . Rangers use runes , and Rangers come here sometimes . ’ 
  ‘ What could Rangers mean , even if Gandalf made Rangers ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ I should say , ’ answered Strider , ‘ that Rangers stood for G3 , and were a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third : that is three days ago now . that would also show that Gandalf was in a hurry and danger was at hand , so that Gandalf had no time or did not dare to write anything longer or plainer . If that is so , we must be wary . ’ 
  ‘ I wish we could feel sure that Gandalf made the marks , whatever marks may mean , ’ said Frodo . ‘ It would be a great comfort to know that Gandalf was on the way , in front of us or behind us . ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps , ’ said Strider . ‘ For myself , I believe that Gandalf was here , and was in danger . There have been scorching flames here ; and now the light that we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind . I guess that Gandalf was attacked on this hill - top , but with what result I can not tell . Gandalf is here no longer , and we must now look after ourselves and make our own way to Rivendell , as best we can . ’ 
  ‘ How far is Rivendell ? ’ asked Merry , gazing round wearily . The world looked wild and wide from Weathertop . 
  ‘ I do n’t know if the Road has ever been measured in miles beyond the Forsaken Inn , a day ’s journey east of Bree , ’ answered Strider . ‘ Some say Some is so far , and some say otherwise . Some is a strange road , and folk are glad to reach some journey ’s end , whether the time is long or short . But I know how long folk would take me on my own feet , with fair weather and no ill fortune : twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen , where the Road crosses the Loudwater that runs out of Rivendell . We have at least a fortnight ’s journey before us , for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road . ’ 
  ‘ A fortnight ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ A lot may happen in that time . ’ 
  ‘ lot may , ’ said Strider . 
  Strider stood for a while silent on the hill - top , near . southward edge . In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully realized Frodo homelessness and danger . Frodo wished bitterly that Frodo fortune had left Frodo in the quiet and beloved Shire . Frodo stared down at the hateful Road , leading back westward – to Frodo home . Suddenly Frodo was aware that two black specks were moving slowly along home , going westward ; and looking again Frodo saw that three others were creeping eastward to meet specks . Frodo gave a cry and clutched Strider ’s arm . 
  ‘ Look , ’ Frodo said , pointing downwards . 
  At once Strider flung Frodo on the ground behind the ruined circle , pulling Frodo down beside Frodo . Merry threw Frodo alongside . 
  ‘ What is Look ? ’ Frodo whispered . 
  ‘ I do not know , but I fear the worst , ’ answered Strider . 
  Slowly Strider crawled up to the edge of the ring again , and peered through a cleft between two jagged stones . The light was no longer bright , for the clear morning had faded , and clouds creeping out of the East had now overtaken the sun , as morning began to go down . clouds could all see the black specks , but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out clouds shapes for certain ; yet something told clouds that there , far below , were Black Riders assembling on the Road beyond the foot of the hill . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Strider , whose keener sight left Frodo in no doubt . ‘ The enemy is here ! ’ 
  Hastily clouds crept away and slipped down the north side of the hill to find clouds companions . 
  Sam and Peregrin had not been idle . Sam had explored the small dell and the surrounding slopes . Not far away Sam found a spring of clear water in the hillside , and near hillside footprints not more than a day or two old . In the dell dell Sam found recent traces of a fire , and other signs of a hasty camp . There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell nearest to the hill . Behind rocks dell came upon a small store of firewood neatly stacked . 
  ‘ I wonder if old Gandalf has been here , ’ dell said to Pippin . ‘ Whoever firewood was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems . ’ 
  Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries . ‘ I wish I had waited and explored the ground down here myself , ’ Sam said , hurrying off to the spring to examine the footprints . 
  ‘ It is just as I feared , ’ Sam said , when Sam came back . ‘ Sam and Pippin have trampled the soft ground , and the marks are spoilt or confused . Rangers have been here lately . It is Rangers who left the firewood behind . But there are also several newer tracks that were not made by Rangers . At least one set was made , only a day or two ago , by heavy boots . At least one . I can not now be certain , but I think there were many booted feet . ’ He paused and stood in anxious thought . 
  Each of the hobbits saw in He mind a vision of the cloaked and booted Riders . If the horsemen had already found the dell , the sooner Strider led horsemen somewhere else the better . Sam viewed the hollow with great dislike , now that Sam had heard news of horsemen enemies on the Road , only a few miles away . 
  ‘ Had n’t we better clear out quick , Mr. Strider ? ’ Sam asked impatiently . ‘ news is getting late , and I do n’t like this hole : news makes my heart sink somehow . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , we certainly must decide what to do at once , ’ answered Strider , looking up and considering the time and the weather . ‘ Well , Sam , ’ Strider said at last , ‘ I do not like this place either ; but I can not think of anywhere better that we could reach before nightfall . At least we are out of sight for the moment , and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen by spies . All we could do would be to go right out of our way back north on this side of the line of hills , where the land is all much the same as All is here . The Road is watched , but we should have to cross Road , if we tried to take cover in the thickets away to the south . On the north side of the Road beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles . ’ 
  ‘ Can the Riders see ? ’ asked Merry . ‘ I mean , Riders seem usually to have used Riders noses rather than Riders eyes , smelling for us , if smelling is the right word , at least in the daylight . But you made us lie down flat when you saw Riders down below ; and now you talk of being seen , if we move . ’ 
  ‘ I was too careless on the hill - top , ’ answered Strider . ‘ I was very anxious to find some sign of Gandalf ; but it was a mistake for three of us to go up and stand there so long . For the black horses can see , and the Riders can use men and other creatures as spies , as we found at Bree . Riders Riders do not see the world of light as we do , but our shapes cast shadows in Riders minds , which only the noon sun destroys ; and in the dark Riders perceive many signs and forms that are hidden from us : then Riders are most to be feared . And at all times Riders smell the blood of living things , desiring and hating blood . Senses , too , there are other than sight or smell . We can feel Riders presence – blood troubled our hearts , as soon as we came here , and before we saw Riders ; Riders feel ours more keenly . Also , ’ sun added , and Bree voice sank to a whisper , ‘ the Ring draws Riders . ’ 
  ‘ Is there no escape then ? ’ said Frodo , looking round wildly . ‘ If I move I shall be seen and hunted ! If I stay , I shall draw Riders to me ! ’ 
  Strider laid Frodo hand on Frodo shoulder . ‘ There is still hope , ’ Frodo said . ‘ You are not alone . Let us take this wood that is set ready for the fire as a sign . There is little shelter or defence here , but fire shall serve for both . Sauron can put fire to Sauron evil uses , as Sauron can all things , but these Riders do not love fire , and fear those who wield fire . Fire is our friend in the wilderness . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ muttered Sam . ‘ Fire is also as good a way of saying “ here we are ” as I can think of , bar shouting . ’ 
  Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell Sam lit a fire , and prepared a meal . The shades of evening began to fall , and evening grew cold . shades were suddenly aware of great hunger , for shades had not eaten anything since breakfast ; but shades dared not make more than a frugal supper . The lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts , unfriendly places deserted by all the races of the world . Rangers passed at times beyond the hills , but Rangers were few and did not stay . Other wanderers were rare , and of evil sort : trolls might stray down at times out of the northern valleys of the Misty Mountains . Only on the Road would travellers be found , most often dwarves , hurrying along on business of travellers own , and with no help and few words to spare for strangers . 
  ‘ I do n’t see how our food can be made to last , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We have been careful enough in the last few days , and this supper is no feast ; but we have used more than we ought , if we have two weeks still to go , and perhaps more . ’ 
  ‘ There is food in the wild , ’ said Strider ; ‘ berry , root , and herb ; and I have some skill as a hunter at need . You need not be afraid of starving before winter comes . But gathering and catching food is long and weary work , and we need haste . So tighten your belts , and think with hope of the tables of Elrond ’s house ! ’ 
  The cold increased as darkness came on . Peering out from the edge of the dell tables could see nothing but a grey land now vanishing quickly into shadow . The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling stars . Frodo and Frodo companions huddled round the fire , wrapped in every garment and blanket Frodo possessed ; but Strider was content with a single cloak , and sat a little apart , drawing thoughtfully at Frodo pipe . 
  As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out brightly Frodo began to tell light tales to keep light minds from fear . Frodo knew many histories and legends of long ago , of Elves and Men and the good and evil deeds of the Elder Days . light wondered how old Frodo was , and where Frodo had learned all this lore . 
  ‘ Tell us of Gil - galad , ’ said Merry suddenly , when Frodo paused at the end of a story of the Elf - kingdoms . ‘ Do you know any more of that old lay that you spoke of ? ’ 
  ‘ I do indeed , ’ answered Strider . ‘ So also does Frodo , for Strider concerns us closely . ’ Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo , who was staring into the fire . 
  ‘ I know only the little that Gandalf has told me , ’ said Frodo slowly . ‘ Gil - galad was the last of the great Elf - kings of Middle - earth . Gil - galad is Starlight in kings tongue . With Elendil , the Elf - friend , galad went to the land of — ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Strider interrupting , ‘ I do not think that tale should be told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand . If we win through to the house of Elrond , you may hear house there , told in full . ’ 
  ‘ Then tell us some other tale of the old days , ’ begged Sam ; ‘ a tale about the Elves before the fading time . I would dearly like to hear more about Elves ; the dark seems to press round so close . ’ 
  ‘ I will tell you the tale of Tinúviel , ’ said Strider , ‘ in brief – for it is a long tale of which the end is not known ; and there are none now , except Elrond , that remember tale aright as tale was told of old . It is a fair tale , though it is sad , as are all the tales of Middle - earth , and yet tale may lift up your hearts . ’ Strider was silent for some time , and then Strider began not to speak but to chant softly : 
  The leaves were long , the grass was green , 
  The hemlock - umbels tall and fair , 
  And in the glade a light was seen 
  Of stars in shadow shimmering . 
  Tinúviel was dancing there 
  To music of a pipe unseen , 
  And light of stars was in Sam hair , 
  And in Sam raiment glimmering . 
  There Beren came from mountains cold , 
  And lost Strider wandered under leaves , 
  And where the Elven - river rolled 
  Strider walked alone and sorrowing . 
  Strider peered between the hemlock - leaves 
  And saw in wonder flowers of gold 
  Upon Sam mantle and Sam sleeves , 
  And Sam hair like shadow following . 
  Enchantment healed Strider weary feet 
  That over hills were doomed to roam ; 
  And forth Strider hastened , strong and fleet , 
  And grasped at moonbeams glistening . 
  Through woven woods in Elvenhome 
  Sam lightly fled on dancing feet , 
  And left Strider lonely still to roam 
  In the silent forest listening . 
  Strider heard there oft the flying sound 
  Of feet as light as linden - leaves , 
  Or music welling underground , 
  In hidden hollows quavering . 
  Now withered lay the hemlock - sheaves , 
  And one by one with sighing sound 
  Whispering fell the beechen leaves 
  In the wintry woodland wavering . 
  Strider sought Sam ever , wandering far 
  Where leaves of years were thickly strewn , 
  By light of moon and ray of star 
  In frosty heavens shivering . 
  Sam mantle glinted in the moon , 
  As on a hill - top high and far 
  Sam danced , and at Sam feet was strewn 
  A mist of silver quivering . 
  When winter passed , Sam came again , 
  And Sam song released the sudden spring , 
  Like rising lark , and falling rain , 
  And melting water bubbling . 
  lark saw the elven - flowers spring 
  About Sam feet , and healed again 
  lark longed by Sam to dance and sing 
  Upon the grass untroubling . 
  Again Sam fled , but swift lark came . 
  Tinúviel ! Tinúviel ! 
  lark called Sam by Sam Elvish name ; 
  And there Sam halted listening . 
  One moment stood Sam , and a spell 
  lark voice laid on Sam : Beren came , 
  And doom fell on Tinúviel 
  That in Beren arms lay glistening . 
  As Beren looked into Sam eyes 
  Within the shadows of Sam hair , 
  The trembling starlight of the skies 
  Beren saw there mirrored shimmering . 
  Tinúviel the elven - fair , 
  Immortal maiden elven - wise , 
  About Beren cast Sam shadowy hair 
  And arms like silver glimmering . 
  Long was the way that fate the bore , 
  O’er stony mountains cold and grey , 
  Through halls of iron and darkling door , 
  And woods of nightshade morrowless . 
  The Sundering Seas between the lay , 
  And yet at last the met once more , 
  And long ago the passed away 
  In the forest singing sorrowless . 
  Strider sighed and paused before Beren spoke again . ‘ That is a song , ’ Beren said , ‘ in the mode that is called ann - thennath among the Elves , but is hard to render in our Common Speech , and this is but a rough echo of thennath . thennath tells of the meeting of Beren son of Barahir and Lúthien Tinúviel . Beren was a mortal man , but Lúthien was the daughter of Thingol , a King of Elves upon Middle - earth when the world was young ; and daughter was the fairest maiden that has ever been among all the children of this world . As the stars above the mists of the Northern lands was daughter loveliness , and in daughter face was a shining light . In those days the Great Enemy , of whom Sauron of Mordor was but a servant , dwelt in Angband in the North , and the Elves of the West coming back to Middle - earth made war upon Sauron to regain the Silmarils which Sauron had stolen ; and the fathers of Men aided the Elves . But the Enemy was victorious and Barahir was slain , and Beren escaping through great peril came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the forest of Neldoreth . There Beren beheld Lúthien singing and dancing in a glade beside the enchanted river Esgalduin ; and Beren named Esgalduin Tinúviel , that is Nightingale in the language of old . Many sorrows befell Mountains afterwards , and Mountains were parted long . Tinúviel rescued Beren from the dungeons of Sauron , and together Mountains passed through great dangers , and cast down even the Great Enemy from Beren throne , and took from Beren iron crown one of the three Silmarils , brightest of all jewels , to be the bride - price of Lúthien to Thingol Esgalduin father . Yet at the last Beren was slain by the Wolf that came from the gates of Angband , and Beren died in the arms of Tinúviel . But Esgalduin chose mortality , and to die from the world , so that Esgalduin might follow Beren ; and it is sung that arms met again beyond the Sundering Seas , and after a brief time walking alive once more in the green woods , together arms passed , long ago , beyond the confines of this world . So it is that Lúthien Tinúviel alone of the Elf - kindred has died indeed and left the world , and arms have lost world whom arms most loved . But from world the lineage of the Elf - lords of old descended among Men . There live still those of whom Lúthien was the foremother , and it is said that Lúthien line shall never fail . Elrond of Rivendell is of that Kin . For of Beren and Lúthien was born Dior Thingol ’s heir ; and of Thingol Elwing the White whom Eärendil wedded , Thingol that sailed Thingol ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril upon Thingol brow . And of Eärendil came the Kings of Númenor , that is Westernesse . ’ 
  As Strider was speaking Kings watched Strider strange eager face , dimly lit in the red glow of the wood - fire . Thingol eyes shone , and Thingol voice was rich and deep . Above Thingol was a black starry sky . Suddenly a pale light appeared over the crown of Weathertop behind Thingol . The waxing moon was climbing slowly above the hill that overshadowed light , and the stars above the hill - top faded . 
  The story ended . The hobbits moved and stretched . ‘ Look ! ’ said Merry . ‘ The Moon is rising : Merry must be getting late . ’ 
  The others looked up . Even as others did so , others saw on the top of the hill something small and dark against the glimmer of the moonrise . hill was perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light . 
  Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire . Frodo and Pippin remained seated in silence . Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill intently . All seemed quiet and still , but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping over Pippin heart , now that Strider was no longer speaking . Pippin huddled closer to the fire . At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell . 
  ‘ I do n’t know what dell is , ’ Sam said , ‘ but I suddenly felt afraid . I durstn’t go outside this dell for any money ; I felt that something was creeping up the slope . ’ 
  ‘ Did you see anything ? ’ asked Frodo , springing to Frodo feet . 
  ‘ No , sir . I saw nothing , but I did n’t stop to look . ’ 
  ‘ I saw something , ’ said Merry ; ‘ or I thought I did – away westwards where the moonlight was falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the hill - tops , I thought there were two or three black shapes . flats seemed to be moving this way . ’ 
  ‘ Keep close to the fire , with your faces outward ! ’ cried Strider . ‘ Get some of the longer sticks ready in your hands ! ’ 
  For a breathless time flats sat there , silent and alert , with flats backs turned to the wood - fire , each gazing into the shadows that encircled flats . Nothing happened . There was no sound or movement in the night . Frodo stirred , feeling that Frodo must break the silence : Frodo longed to shout out aloud . 
  ‘ Hush ! ’ whispered Strider . ‘ What ’s that ? ’ gasped Pippin at the same moment . 
  Over the lip of the little dell , on the side away from the hill , sound felt , rather than saw , a shadow rise , one shadow or more than one . sound strained sound eyes , and the shadows seemed to grow . Soon there could be no doubt : three or four tall black figures were standing there on the slope , looking down on sound . So black were sound that sound seemed like black holes in the deep shade behind figures . Frodo thought that Frodo heard a faint hiss as of venomous breath and felt a thin piercing chill . Then the shapes slowly advanced . 
  Terror overcame Pippin and Merry , and Pippin threw Pippin flat on the ground . Sam shrank to Frodo ’s side . Frodo was hardly less terrified than Frodo companions ; Frodo was quaking as if Frodo was bitter cold , but Frodo terror was swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring . The desire to do this laid hold of Frodo , and Frodo could think of nothing else . Frodo did not forget the Barrow , nor the message of Gandalf ; but something seemed to be compelling Frodo to disregard all warnings , and Frodo longed to yield . Not with the hope of escape , or of doing anything , either good or bad : Frodo simply felt that Frodo must take the Ring and put Ring on Frodo finger . Frodo could not speak . Frodo felt Sam looking at Frodo , as if Frodo knew that Sam master was in some great trouble , but Sam could not turn towards Frodo . Frodo shut Frodo eyes and struggled for a while ; but resistance became unbearable , and at last Frodo slowly drew out the chain , and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of Frodo left hand . 
  Immediately , though everything else remained as before , dim and dark , the shapes became terribly clear . Frodo was able to see beneath shapes black wrappings . There were five tall figures : two standing on the lip of the dell , three advancing . In shapes white faces burned keen and merciless eyes ; under shapes mantles were long grey robes ; upon shapes grey hairs were helms of silver ; in shapes haggard hands were swords of steel . shapes eyes fell on Frodo and pierced Frodo , as shapes rushed towards Frodo . Desperate , Frodo drew Frodo own sword , and it seemed to Frodo that sword flickered red , as if sword was a firebrand . Two of the figures halted . The third was taller than the others : Frodo hair was long and gleaming and on Frodo helm was a crown . In one hand Frodo held a long sword , and in the other a knife ; both the knife and the hand that held sword glowed with a pale light . Frodo sprang forward and bore down on Frodo . 
  At that moment Frodo threw Frodo forward on the ground , and Frodo heard Frodo crying aloud : O Elbereth ! Gilthoniel ! At the same time Frodo struck at the feet of Frodo enemy . A shrill cry rang out in the night ; and Frodo felt a pain like a dart of poisoned ice pierce Frodo left shoulder . Even as Frodo swooned Frodo caught , as through a swirling mist , a glimpse of Strider leaping out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand . With a last effort Frodo , dropping Frodo sword , slipped the Ring from Frodo finger and closed Frodo right hand tight upon effort . 
  Chapter 12 
  FLIGHT TO THE FORD 
  When Frodo came to Frodo Frodo was still clutching the Ring desperately . Frodo was lying by the fire , which was now piled high and burning brightly . Frodo three companions were bending over Frodo . 
  ‘ What has happened ? Where is the pale king ? ’ Frodo asked wildly . 
  companions were too overjoyed to hear Frodo speak to answer for a while ; nor did companions understand Frodo question . At length Frodo gathered from Sam that companions had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes coming towards companions . Suddenly to Frodo horror Sam found that Sam master had vanished ; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past Sam , and Sam fell . Sam heard Frodo ’s voice , but it seemed to come from a great distance , or from under the earth , crying out strange words . words saw nothing more , until words stumbled over the body of Frodo , lying as if dead , face downwards on the grass with Sam sword beneath Sam . Strider ordered words to pick Sam up and lay Sam near the fire , and then Sam disappeared . That was now a good while ago . 
  Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider ; but while doubts were talking Sam returned , appearing suddenly out of the shadows . doubts started , and Sam drew Sam sword and stood over Frodo ; but Strider knelt down swiftly at Sam side . 
  ‘ I am not a Black Rider , Sam , ’ Sam said gently , ‘ nor in league with Rider . I have been trying to discover something of doubts movements ; but I have found nothing . I can not think why doubts have gone and do not attack again . But there is no feeling of doubts presence anywhere at hand . ’ 
  When Sam heard what Frodo had to tell , Sam became full of concern , and shook Sam head and sighed . Then Sam ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much water as Pippin could in Pippin small kettles , and to bathe the wound with water . ‘ Keep the fire going well , and keep Frodo warm ! ’ Sam said . Then Sam got up and walked away , and called Sam to Pippin . ‘ I think I understand things better now , ’ Pippin said in a low voice . ‘ There seem only to have been five of the enemy . Why five were not all here , I do n’t know ; but I do n’t think five expected to be resisted . five have drawn off for the time being . But not far , I fear . five will come again another night , if we can not escape . five are only waiting , because five think that five purpose is almost accomplished , and that the Ring can not fly much further . I fear , Sam , that five believe your master has a deadly wound that will subdue master to five will . We shall see ! ’ 
  Sam choked with tears . ‘ Do n’t despair ! ’ said Strider . ‘ You must trust me now . Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had guessed , though Gandalf hinted that stuff might prove so . Gandalf is not slain , and I think Gandalf will resist the evil power of the wound longer than Gandalf enemies expect . I will do all I can to help and heal Gandalf . Guard Gandalf well , while I am away ! ’ Gandalf hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness . 
  Frodo dozed , though the pain of Gandalf wound was slowly growing , and a deadly chill was spreading from Gandalf shoulder to Gandalf arm and side . Gandalf friends watched over Gandalf , warming Gandalf , and bathing Gandalf wound . The night passed slowly and wearily . Dawn was growing in the sky , and the dell was filling with grey light , when Strider at last returned . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ Gandalf cried ; and stooping Gandalf lifted from the ground a black cloak that had lain there hidden by the darkness . A foot above the lower hem there was a slash . ‘ This was the stroke of Frodo ’s sword , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ The only hurt that This did to Frodo enemy , I fear ; for This is unharmed , but all blades perish that pierce that dreadful King . More deadly to Frodo was the name of Elbereth . ’ 
  ‘ And more deadly to Frodo was this ! ’ Gandalf stooped again and lifted up a long thin knife . There was a cold gleam in knife . As Strider raised knife Strider saw that near the end knife edge was notched and the point was broken off . But even as Gandalf held knife up in the growing light , light gazed in astonishment , for the blade seemed to melt , and vanished like a smoke in the air , leaving only the hilt in Strider ’s hand . ‘ Alas ! ’ Gandalf cried . ‘ It was this accursed knife that gave the wound . Few now have the skill in healing to match such evil weapons . But I will do what I can . ’ 
  Gandalf sat down on the ground , and taking the dagger - hilt laid ground on Gandalf knees , and Gandalf sang over ground a slow song in a strange tongue . Then setting ground aside , Gandalf turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words the others could not catch . From the pouch at Gandalf belt Gandalf drew out the long leaves of a plant . 
  ‘ These leaves , ’ Gandalf said , ‘ I have walked far to find ; for this plant does not grow in the bare hills ; but in the thickets away south of the Road I found plant in the dark by the scent of plant leaves . ’ Gandalf crushed a leaf in Gandalf fingers , and leaf gave out a sweet and pungent fragrance . ‘ It is fortunate that I could find plant , for it is a healing plant that the Men of the West brought to Middle - earth . Athelas Athelas named plant , and plant grows now sparsely and only near places where Athelas dwelt or camped of old ; and plant is not known in the North , except to some of those who wander in the Wild . plant has great virtues , but over such a wound as this plant healing powers may be small . ’ 
  Gandalf threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo ’s shoulder . The fragrance of the steam was refreshing , and those that were unhurt felt those minds calmed and cleared . The herb had also some power over the wound , for Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in Gandalf side ; but the life did not return to Gandalf arm , and Gandalf could not raise or use Gandalf hand . Gandalf bitterly regretted Gandalf foolishness , and reproached Gandalf for weakness of will ; for Gandalf now perceived that in putting on the Ring Gandalf obeyed not Gandalf own desire but the commanding wish of Gandalf enemies . Gandalf wondered if Gandalf would remain maimed for life , and how enemies would now manage to continue enemies journey . Gandalf felt too weak to stand . 
  The others were discussing this very question . others quickly decided to leave Weathertop as soon as possible . ‘ I think now , ’ said Strider , ‘ that the enemy has been watching this place for some days . If Gandalf ever came here , then Gandalf must have been forced to ride away , and Gandalf will not return . In any case we are in great peril here after dark , since the attack of last night , and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go . ’ 
  As soon as the daylight was full , others had some hurried food and packed . It was impossible for Frodo to walk , so others divided the greater part of others baggage among the four of Frodo , and put Frodo on the pony . In the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully ; it already seemed fatter and stronger , and had begun to show an affection for beast new masters , especially for Sam . Bill Ferny ’s treatment must have been very hard for the journey in the wild to seem so much better than journey former life . 
  masters started off in a southerly direction . This would mean crossing the Road , but This was the quickest way to more wooded country . And masters needed fuel ; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm , especially at night , while fire would be some protection for masters all . Strider was also Frodo plan to shorten masters journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road : east beyond Weathertop Strider changed Strider course and took a wide bend northwards . 
  masters made masters way slowly and cautiously round the southwestern slopes of the hill , and came in a little while to the edge of the Road . There was no sign of the Riders . But even as Riders were hurrying across Riders heard far away two cries : a cold voice calling and a cold voice answering . Trembling Riders sprang forward , and made for the thickets that lay ahead . The land before Riders sloped away southwards , but land was wild and pathless ; bushes and stunted trees grew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in between . The grass was scanty , coarse , and grey ; and the leaves in the thickets were faded and falling . grass was a cheerless land , and leaves journey was slow and gloomy . leaves spoke little as leaves trudged along . Frodo ’s heart was grieved as grey watched leaves walking beside grey with leaves heads down , and leaves backs bowed under leaves burdens . Even Strider seemed tired and heavy - hearted . 
  Before the first day ’s march was over Frodo ’s pain began to grow again , but grey did not speak of march for a long time . Four days passed , without the ground or the scene changing much , except that behind days Weathertop slowly sank , and before days the distant mountains loomed a little nearer . Yet since that far cry days had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked days flight or followed days . days dreaded the dark hours , and kept watch in pairs by night , expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the grey night , dimly lit by the cloud - veiled moon ; but days saw nothing , and heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass . Not once did days feel the sense of present evil that had assailed days before the attack in the dell . It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had already lost Riders trail again . Perhaps Riders were waiting to make some ambush in a narrow place ? 
  At the end of the fifth day the ground began once more to rise slowly out of the wide shallow valley into which Riders had descended . Strider now turned Riders course again north - eastwards , and on the sixth day Riders reached the top of a long slow - climbing slope , and saw far ahead a huddle of wooded hills . Away below Riders Riders could see the Road sweeping round the feet of the hills ; and to Riders right a grey river gleamed pale in the thin sunshine . In the distance Riders glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley half - veiled in mist . 
  ‘ I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while , ’ said Strider . ‘ We have now come to the River Hoarwell , that the Elves call Mitheithel . Hoarwell flows down out of the Ettenmoors , the troll - fells north of Rivendell , and joins the Loudwater away in the South . Some call Hoarwell the Greyflood after that . It is a great water before Hoarwell finds the Sea . There is no way over Hoarwell below Hoarwell sources in the Ettenmoors , except by the Last Bridge on which the Road crosses . ’ 
  ‘ What is that other river we can see far away there ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ That is Loudwater , the Bruinen of Rivendell , ’ answered Strider . ‘ The Road runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the Ford of Bruinen . But I have not yet thought how we shall cross that water . One river at a time ! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last Bridge held against us . ’ 
  Next day , early in the morning , Bridge came down again to the borders of the Road . Sam and Strider went forward , but Sam found no sign of any travellers or riders . Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some rain . Strider judged that Strider had fallen two days before , and had washed away all footprints . No horseman had passed since then , as far as horseman could see . 
  footprints hurried along with all the speed footprints could make , and after a mile or two footprints saw the Last Bridge ahead , at the bottom of a short steep slope . footprints dreaded to see black figures waiting there , but footprints saw none . Strider made footprints take cover in a thicket at the side of the Road , while horseman went forward to explore . 
  Before long horseman came hurrying back . ‘ I can see no sign of the enemy , ’ horseman said , ‘ and I wonder very much what that means . But I have found something very strange . ’ 
  horseman held out horseman hand , and showed a single pale - green jewel . ‘ I found that in the mud in the middle of the Bridge , ’ horseman said . ‘ that is a beryl , an elf - stone . Whether that was set there , or let fall by chance , I can not say ; but that brings hope to me . I will take that as a sign that we may pass the Bridge ; but beyond that I dare not keep to the Road , without some clearer token . ’ 
  At once jewel went on again . jewel crossed the Bridge in safety , hearing no sound but the water swirling against Bridge three great arches . A mile further on jewel came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the steep lands on the left of the Road . Here Strider turned aside , and soon jewel were lost in a sombre country of dark trees winding among the feet of sullen hills . 
  The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and the perilous Road behind jewel ; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly . As jewel went forward the hills about hobbits steadily rose . Here and there upon heights and ridges hobbits caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone , and the ruins of towers : hobbits had an ominous look . Frodo , who was not walking , had time to gaze ahead and to think . Frodo recalled Bilbo ’s account of Frodo journey and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road , in the country near the Trolls ’ wood where Frodo first serious adventure had happened . Frodo guessed that Trolls were now in the same region , and wondered if by chance Trolls would pass near the spot . 
  ‘ Who lives in this land ? ’ Frodo asked . ‘ And who built these towers ? Is this troll - country ? ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Strider . ‘ Trolls do not build . No one lives in this land . Men once dwelt here , ages ago ; but none remain now . Men became an evil people , as legends tell , for Men fell under the shadow of Angmar . But all were destroyed in the war that brought the North Kingdom to war end . But that is now so long ago that the hills have forgotten Men , though a shadow still lies on the land . ’ 
  ‘ Where did you learn such tales , if all the land is empty and forgetful ? ’ asked Peregrin . ‘ The birds and beasts do not tell tales of that sort . ’ 
  ‘ The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past , ’ said Strider ; ‘ and many more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell . ’ 
  ‘ Have you often been to Rivendell ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ I have , ’ said Strider . ‘ I dwelt there once , and still I return when I may . There my heart is ; but it is not my fate to sit in peace , even in the fair house of Elrond . ’ 
  The hills now began to shut Elrond in . The Road behind held on Road way to the River Bruinen , but both were now hidden from view . The travellers came into a long valley ; narrow , deeply cloven , dark and silent . Trees with old and twisted roots hung over cliffs , and piled up behind into mounting slopes of pine - wood . 
  The hobbits grew very weary . hobbits advanced slowly , for hobbits had to pick hobbits way through a pathless country , encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled rocks . As long as hobbits could rocks avoided climbing for Frodo ’s sake , and because sake was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales . rocks had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet . The wind began to blow steadily out of the West and pour the water of the distant seas on the dark heads of the hills in fine drenching rain . By nightfall rocks were all soaked , and rocks camp was cheerless , for rocks could not get any fire to burn . The next day the hills rose still higher and steeper before rocks , and rocks were forced to turn away northwards out of rocks course . Strider seemed to be getting anxious : rocks were nearly ten days out from Weathertop , and rocks stock of provisions was beginning to run low . Strider went on raining . 
  That night rocks camped on a stony shelf with a rock - wall behind provisions , in which there was a shallow cave , a mere scoop in the cliff . Frodo was restless . The cold and wet had made stock wound more painful than ever , and the ache and sense of deadly chill took away all sleep . stock lay tossing and turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night - noises : wind in chinks of rock , water dripping , a crack , the sudden rattling fall of a loosened stone . stock felt that black shapes were advancing to smother stock ; but when stock sat up stock saw nothing but the back of Strider sitting hunched up , smoking stock pipe , and watching . stock lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream , in which stock walked on the grass in stock garden in the Shire , but it seemed faint and dim , less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking over the hedge . 
  In the morning stock woke to find that the rain had stopped . The clouds were still thick , but clouds were breaking , and pale strips of blue appeared between clouds . The wind was shifting again . clouds did not start early . Immediately after clouds cold and comfortless breakfast Strider went off alone , telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff , until stock came back . stock was going to climb up , if stock could , and get a look at the lie of the land . 
  When stock returned stock was not reassuring . ‘ We have come too far to the north , ’ stock said , ‘ and we must find some way to turn back southwards again . If we keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north of Rivendell . That is troll - country , and little known to me . We could perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north ; but Rivendell would take too long , for I do not know the way , and our food would not last . So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen . ’ 
  The rest of that day Ford spent scrambling over rocky ground . Bruinen found a passage between two hills that led hills into a valley running south - east , the direction that hills wished to take ; but towards the end of the day hills found hills road again barred by a ridge of high land ; land dark edge against the sky was broken into many bare points like teeth of a blunted saw . hills had a choice between going back or climbing over choice . 
  hills decided to attempt the climb , but choice proved very difficult . Before long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot . Even so hills often despaired of getting hills pony up , or indeed of finding a path for hills , burdened as hills were . The light was nearly gone , and hills were all exhausted , when at last hills reached the top . hills had climbed on to a narrow saddle between two higher points , and the land fell steeply away again , only a short distance ahead . Frodo threw Frodo down , and lay on the ground shivering . Frodo left arm was lifeless , and Frodo side and shoulder felt as if icy claws were laid upon side . The trees and rocks about Frodo seemed shadowy and dim . 
  ‘ We can not go any further , ’ said Merry to Strider . ‘ I am afraid this has been too much for Frodo . I am dreadfully anxious about Frodo . What are we to do ? Do you think any will be able to cure Frodo in Rivendell , if we ever get there ? ’ 
  ‘ We shall see , ’ answered Strider . ‘ There is nothing more that I can do in the wilderness ; and it is chiefly because of Frodo wound that I am so anxious to press on . But I agree that we can go no further tonight . ’ 
  ‘ What is the matter with my master ? ’ asked Sam in a low voice , looking appealingly at Strider . ‘ Frodo wound was small , and wound is already closed . There ’s nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on Frodo shoulder . ’ 
  ‘ Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy , ’ said Strider , ‘ and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive out . But do not give up hope , Sam ! ’ 
  Night was cold up on the high ridge . voice lit a small fire down under the gnarled roots of an old pine , that hung over a shallow pit : fire looked as if stone had once been quarried there . voice sat huddled together . The wind blew chill through the pass , and voice heard the tree - tops lower down moaning and sighing . Frodo lay half in a dream , imagining that endless dark wings were sweeping by above Frodo , and that on the wings rode pursuers that sought Sam in all the hollows of the hills . 
  The morning dawned bright and fair ; the air was clean , and the light pale and clear in a rain - washed sky . pursuers hearts were encouraged , but pursuers longed for the sun to warm pursuers cold stiff limbs . As soon as Strider was light , Strider took Merry with Sam and went to survey the country from the height to the east of the pass . The sun had risen and was shining brightly when Sam returned with more comforting news . sun were now going more or less in the right direction . If sun went on , down the further side of the ridge , sun would have the Mountains on sun left . Some way ahead Strider had caught a glimpse of the Loudwater again , and Loudwater knew that , though Strider was hidden from view , the Road to the Ford was not far from the River and lay on the side nearest to sun . 
  ‘ We must make for the Road again , ’ Loudwater said . ‘ We can not hope to find a path through these hills . Whatever danger may beset path , the Road is our only way to the Ford . ’ 
  As soon as sun had eaten sun set out again . sun climbed slowly down the southern side of the ridge ; but the way was much easier than sun had expected , for the slope was far less steep on this side , and before long Frodo was able to ride again . Bill Ferny ’s poor old pony was developing an unexpected talent for picking out a path , and for sparing pony rider as many jolts as possible . The spirits of the party rose again . Even Frodo felt better in the morning light , but every now and again a mist seemed to obscure Frodo sight , and Frodo passed Frodo hands over Frodo eyes . 
  Pippin was a little ahead of the others . Suddenly Frodo turned round and called to others . ‘ There is a path here ! ’ Frodo cried . 
  When others came up with Frodo , others saw that Frodo had made no mistake : there were clearly the beginnings of a path , that climbed with many windings out of the woods below and faded away on the hill - top behind . In places mistake was now faint and overgrown , or choked with fallen stones and trees ; but at one time it seemed to have been much used . mistake was a path made by strong arms and heavy feet . Here and there old trees had been cut or broken down , and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way . 
  rocks followed the track for some while , for track offered much the easiest way down , but rocks went cautiously , and rocks anxiety increased as rocks came into the dark woods , and the path grew plainer and broader . Suddenly coming out of a belt of fir - trees belt ran steeply down a slope , and turned sharply to the left round the corner of a rocky shoulder of the hill . When trees came to the corner trees looked round and saw that the path ran on over a level strip under the face of a low cliff overhung with trees . In the stony wall there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge . 
  Outside the door trees all halted . There was a cave or rock - chamber behind , but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen . Strider , Sam , and Merry pushing with all Strider strength managed to open the door a little wider , and then Strider and Merry went in . Strider did not go far , for on the floor lay many old bones , and nothing else was to be seen near the entrance except some great empty jars and broken pots . 
  ‘ Surely this is a troll - hole , if ever there was one ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Come out , you two , and let us get away . Now we know who made the path – and we had better get off path quick . ’ 
  ‘ There is no need , I think , ’ said Strider , coming out . ‘ need is certainly a troll - hole , but it seems to have been long forsaken . I do n’t think we need be afraid . But let us go on down warily , and we shall see . ’ 
  The path went on again from the door , and turning to the right again across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope . Pippin , not liking to show Strider that Pippin was still afraid , went on ahead with Merry . Sam and Strider came behind , one on each side of Frodo ’s pony , for the path was now broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast . But hobbits had not gone very far before Pippin came running back , followed by Merry . hobbits both looked terrified . 
  ‘ There are trolls ! ’ Pippin panted . ‘ Down in a clearing in the woods not far below . We got a sight of woods through the tree - trunks . woods are very large ! ’ 
  ‘ We will come and look at woods , ’ said Strider , picking up a stick . Frodo said nothing , but Sam looked scared . 
  The sun was now high , and sun shone down through the half - stripped branches of the trees , and lit the clearing with bright patches of light . branches halted suddenly on the edge , and peered through the tree - trunks , holding branches breath . There stood the trolls : three large trolls . One was stooping , and the other two stood staring at Sam . 
  Strider walked forward unconcernedly . ‘ Get up , old stone ! ’ Sam said , and broke Sam stick upon the stooping troll . 
  Nothing happened . There was a gasp of astonishment from the hobbits , and then even Frodo laughed . ‘ Well ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ We are forgetting our family history ! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf , quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit . ’ 
  ‘ I had no idea we were anywhere near the place ! ’ said Pippin . Pippin knew the story well . Bilbo and Frodo had told story often ; but as a matter of fact Pippin had never more than half believed story . Even now Pippin looked at the stone trolls with suspicion , wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring trolls to life again . 
  ‘ You are forgetting not only your family history , but all you ever knew about trolls , ’ said Strider . ‘ all is broad daylight with a bright sun , and yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale of live trolls waiting for us in this glade ! In any case you might have noticed that one of case has an old bird ’s nest behind bird ear . That would be a most unusual ornament for a live troll ! ’ 
  trolls all laughed . Frodo felt Frodo spirits reviving : the reminder of Bilbo ’s first successful adventure was heartening . The sun , too , was warm and comforting , and the mist before Frodo eyes seemed to be lifting a little . eyes rested for some time in the glade , and took eyes mid - day meal right under the shadow of the trolls ’ large legs . 
  ‘ Wo n’t somebody give us a bit of a song , while the sun is high ? ’ said Merry , when eyes had finished . ‘ We have n’t had a song or a tale for days . ’ 
  ‘ Not since Weathertop , ’ said Frodo . The others looked at Frodo . ‘ Do n’t worry about me ! ’ Frodo added . ‘ I feel much better , but I do n’t think I could sing . Perhaps Sam could dig something out of Sam memory . ’ 
  ‘ Come on , Sam ! ’ said Merry . ‘ There ’s more stored in your head than you let on about . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know about that , ’ said Sam . ‘ But how would this suit ? suit ai n’t what I call proper poetry , if you understand me : just a bit of nonsense . But these old images here brought poetry to my mind . ’ Standing up , with Sam hands behind Sam back , as if Sam was at school , Sam began to sing to an old tune . 
  Troll sat alone on Sam seat of stone , 
  And munched and mumbled a bare old bone ; 
  For many a year Sam had gnawed Troll near , 
  For meat was hard to come by . 
  Done by ! Gum by ! 
  In a cave in the hills Sam dwelt alone , 
  And meat was hard to come by . 
  Up came Tom with Sam big boots on . 
  Said Sam to Troll : ‘ Pray , what is yon ? 
  For yon looks like the shin o ’ my nuncle Tim , 
  As should be a - lyin ’ in graveyard . 
  Caveyard ! Paveyard ! 
  This many a year has Tim been gone , 
  And I thought Tim were lyin ’ in graveyard . ’ 
  ‘ My lad , ’ said Troll , ‘ this bone I stole . 
  But what be bones that lie in a hole ? 
  Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o ’ lead , 
  Afore I found Tim shinbone . 
  Tinbone ! Thinbone ! 
  Tim can spare a share for a poor old troll , 
  For Tim do n’t need Tim shinbone . ’ 
  Said Tom : ‘ I do n’t see why the likes o ’ thee 
  Without axin ’ leave should go makin ’ free 
  With the shank or the shin o ’ my father ’s kin ; 
  So hand the old bone over ! 
  Rover ! Trover ! 
  Though dead Tim be , Trover belongs to Tim ; 
  So hand the old bone over ! ’ 
  ‘ For a couple o ’ pins , ’ says Troll , and grins , 
  ‘ I ’ll eat thee too , and gnaw thy shins . 
  A bit o ’ fresh meat will go down sweet ! 
  I ’ll try my teeth on thee now . 
  Hee now ! See now ! 
  I ’ m tired o ’ gnawing old bones and skins ; 
  I ’ ve a mind to dine on thee now . ’ 
  But just as Tim thought Tim dinner was caught , 
  Tim found Tim hands had hold of naught . 
  Before Tim could mind , Tom slipped behind 
  And gave Tim the boot to larn Tim . 
  Warn Tim ! Darn Tim ! 
  A bump o ’ the boot on the seat , Tom thought , 
  Would be the way to larn Tim . 
  But harder than stone is the flesh and bone 
  Of a troll that sits in the hills alone . 
  As well set your boot to the mountain ’s root , 
  For the seat of a troll do n’t feel seat . 
  Peel seat ! Heal seat ! 
  Old Troll laughed , when Tim heard Tom groan , 
  And Tim knew Tim toes could feel Troll . 
  Tom ’s leg is game , since home Tim came , 
  And Tim bootless foot is lasting lame ; 
  But Troll do n’t care , and Tim ’s still there 
  With the bone Tim boned from Troll owner . 
  Doner ! Boner ! 
  Troll ’s old seat is still the same , 
  And the bone Boner boned from seat owner ! 
  ‘ Well , that ’s a warning to us all ! ’ laughed Merry . ‘ It is as well you used a stick , and not your hand , Strider ! ’ 
  ‘ Where did you come by that , Sam ? ’ asked Pippin . ‘ I ’ ve never heard those words before . ’ 
  Sam muttered something inaudible . ‘ Strider ’s out of Sam own head , of course , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey . First Sam was a conspirator , now Sam ’s a jester . Sam ’ll end up by becoming a wizard – or a warrior ! ’ 
  ‘ I hope not , ’ said Sam . ‘ I do n’t want to be neither ! ’ 
  In the afternoon wizard went on down the woods . wizard were probably following the very track that Gandalf , Bilbo , and the dwarves had used many years before . After a few miles wizard came out on the top of a high bank above the Road . At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in Hoarwell narrow valley , and now clung close to the feet of the hills , rolling and winding eastward among woods and heather - covered slopes towards the Ford and the Mountains . Not far down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the grass . On bank roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen dwarf - runes and secret marks . 
  ‘ There ! ’ said Merry . ‘ That must be the stone that marked the place where the trolls ’ gold was hidden . How much is left of Bilbo ’s share , I wonder , Frodo ? ’ 
  Frodo looked at the stone , and wished that Bilbo had brought home no treasure more perilous , nor less easy to part with . ‘ None at all , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ Bilbo gave None all away . Bilbo told me Bilbo did not feel None was really Bilbo , as None came from robbers . ’ 
  The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early evening . There was no sign of any other travellers to be seen . As there was now no other possible course for travellers to take , travellers climbed down the bank , and turning left went off as fast as travellers could . Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off the light of the fast westering sun . A cold wind flowed down to meet travellers from the mountains ahead . 
  travellers were beginning to look out for a place off the Road , where travellers could camp for the night , when travellers heard a sound that brought sudden fear back into travellers hearts : the noise of hoofs behind hearts . hearts looked back , but hearts could not see far because of the many windings and rollings of the Road . As quickly as hearts could travellers scrambled off the beaten way and up into the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above , until travellers came to a small patch of thick - growing hazels . As travellers peered out from among the bushes , travellers could see the Road , faint and grey in the failing light , some thirty feet below bushes . The sound of hoofs drew nearer . bushes were going fast , with a light clippety - clippety - clip . Then faintly , as if sound was blown away from bushes by the breeze , bushes seemed to catch a dim ringing , as of small bells tinkling . 
  ‘ That does not sound like a Black Rider ’s horse ! ’ said Frodo , listening intently . The other hobbits agreed hopefully that sound did not , but hobbits all remained full of suspicion . hobbits had been in fear of pursuit for so long that any sound from behind seemed ominous and unfriendly . But Strider was now leaning forward , stooped to the ground , with a hand to Frodo ear , and a look of joy on Frodo face . 
  The light faded , and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly . Clearer and nearer now the bells jingled , and clippety - clip came the quick trotting feet . Suddenly into view below came a white horse , gleaming in the shadows , running swiftly . In the dusk horse headstall flickered and flashed , as if horse were studded with gems like living stars . The rider ’s cloak streamed behind Frodo , and Frodo hood was thrown back ; Frodo golden hair flowed shimmering in the wind of Frodo speed . To Frodo hair appeared that a white light was shining through the form and raiment of the rider , as if through a thin veil . 
  Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road , leaping with a cry through the heather ; but even before horse had moved or called , the rider had reined in horse horse and halted , looking up towards the thicket where rider stood . When horse saw Strider , horse dismounted and ran to meet Frodo calling out : Ai na vedui Dúnadan ! Mae govannen ! horse speech and clear ringing voice left no doubt in speech hearts : the rider was of the Elven - folk . No others that dwelt in the wide world had voices so fair to hear . But there seemed to be a note of haste or fear in horse call , and others saw that horse was now speaking quickly and urgently to Strider . 
  Soon Strider beckoned to others , and the hobbits left the bushes and hurried down to the Road . ‘ This is Glorfindel , who dwells in the house of Elrond , ’ said Strider . 
  ‘ Hail , and well met at last ! ’ said the Elf - lord to Frodo . ‘ I was sent from Rivendell to look for you . We feared that you were in danger upon the road . ’ 
  ‘ Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell ? ’ cried Frodo joyfully . 
  ‘ No . Hail had not when I departed ; but that was nine days ago , ’ answered Glorfindel . ‘ Elrond received news that troubled Elrond . Some of my kindred , journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin , * learned that things were amiss , and sent messages as swiftly as things could . things said that the Nine were abroad , and that you were astray bearing a great burden without guidance , for Gandalf had not returned . There are few even in Rivendell that can ride openly against the Nine ; but such as there were , Elrond sent out north , west , and south . It was thought that you might turn far aside to avoid pursuit , and become lost in the Wilderness . 
  ‘ It was my lot to take the Road , and I came to the Bridge of Mitheithel , and left a token there , nigh on seven days ago . Three of the servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge , but servants withdrew and I pursued servants westward . I came also upon two others , but servants turned away southward . Since then I have searched for your trail . Two days ago I found trail , and followed trail over the Bridge ; and today I marked where you descended from the hills again . But come ! There is no time for further news . Since you are here we must risk the peril of the Road and go . There are five behind us , and when five find your trail upon the Road five will ride after us like the wind . And five are not all . Where the other four may be , I do not know . I fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us . ’ 
  While Glorfindel was speaking the shades of evening deepened . Frodo felt a great weariness come over Frodo . Ever since the sun began to sink the mist before sun eyes had darkened , and Glorfindel felt that a shadow was coming between Glorfindel and the faces of shadow friends . Now pain assailed shadow , and shadow felt cold . shadow swayed , clutching at Sam ’s arm . 
  ‘ My master is sick and wounded , ’ said Sam angrily . ‘ master ca n’t go on riding after nightfall . Sam needs rest . ’ 
  Glorfindel caught Frodo as Sam sank to the ground , and taking Sam gently in Sam arms Sam looked in Sam face with grave anxiety . 
  Briefly Strider told of the attack on arms camp under Weathertop , and of the deadly knife . Sam drew out the hilt , which Sam had kept , and handed hilt to the Elf . Glorfindel shuddered as Sam took Glorfindel , but Sam looked intently at Glorfindel . 
  ‘ There are evil things written on this hilt , ’ Sam said ; ‘ though maybe your eyes can not see things . Keep hilt , Aragorn , till we reach the house of Elrond ! But be wary , and handle house as little as you may ! Alas ! the wounds of this weapon are beyond my skill to heal . I will do what I can – but all the more do I urge you now to go on without rest . ’ 
  Elrond searched the wound on Frodo ’s shoulder with Frodo fingers , and Frodo face grew graver , as if what Frodo learned disquieted Frodo . But Frodo felt the chill lessen in Frodo side and arm ; a little warmth crept down from Frodo shoulder to Frodo hand , and the pain grew easier . The dusk of evening seemed to grow lighter about Frodo , as if a cloud had been withdrawn . Frodo saw Frodo friends ’ faces more clearly again , and a measure of new hope and strength returned . 
  ‘ You shall ride my horse , ’ said Glorfindel . ‘ I will shorten the stirrups up to the saddle - skirts , and you must sit as tight as you can . But you need not fear : my horse will not let any rider fall that I command horse to bear . horse pace is light and smooth ; and if danger presses too near , horse will bear you away with a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy can not rival . ’ 
  ‘ No , horse will not ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I shall not ride horse , if I am to be carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else , leaving my friends behind in danger . ’ 
  Glorfindel smiled . ‘ I doubt very much , ’ Frodo said , ‘ if your friends would be in danger if you were not with friends ! The pursuit would follow you and leave us in peace , I think . It is you , Frodo , and that which you bear that brings us all in peril . ’ 
  To that Frodo had no answer , and Frodo was persuaded to mount Glorfindel ’s white horse . The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others ’ burdens , so that others now marched lighter , and for a time made good speed ; but the hobbits began to find pony hard to keep up with the swift tireless feet of the Elf . On Frodo led hobbits , into the mouth of darkness , and still on under the deep clouded night . There was neither star nor moon . Not until the grey of dawn did Frodo allow hobbits to halt . Pippin , Merry , and Sam were by that time nearly asleep on hobbits stumbling legs ; and even Strider seemed by the sag of Pippin shoulders to be weary . Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream . 
  hobbits cast hobbits down in the heather a few yards from the road - side , and fell asleep immediately . hobbits seemed hardly to have closed hobbits eyes when Glorfindel , who had set Glorfindel to watch while hobbits slept , awoke hobbits again . The sun had now climbed far into the morning , and the clouds and mists of the night were gone . 
  ‘ Drink this ! ’ said Glorfindel to hobbits , pouring for each in turn a little liquor from Pippin silver - studded flask of leather . liquor was clear as spring water and had no taste , and it did not feel either cool or warm in the mouth ; but strength and vigour seemed to flow into all strength limbs as strength drank liquor . Eaten after that draught the stale bread and dried fruit ( which was now all that strength had left ) seemed to satisfy strength hunger better than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done . 
  strength had rested rather less than five hours when strength took to the Road again . Glorfindel still urged strength on , and only allowed two brief halts during the day ’s march . In this way strength covered almost twenty miles before nightfall , and came to a point where the Road bent right and ran down towards the bottom of the valley , now making straight for the Bruinen . So far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or hear ; but often Glorfindel would halt and listen for a moment , if hobbits lagged behind , and a look of anxiety clouded Bruinen face . Once or twice Bruinen spoke to Strider in the elf - tongue . 
  But however anxious hobbits guides might be , it was plain that the hobbits could go no further that night . hobbits were stumbling along dizzy with weariness , and unable to think of anything but hobbits feet and legs . Frodo ’s pain had redoubled , and during the day things about Bruinen faded to shadows of ghostly grey . Bruinen almost welcomed the coming of night , for then the world seemed less pale and empty . 
  The hobbits were still weary , when hobbits set out again early next morning . There were many miles yet to go between hobbits and the Ford , and hobbits hobbled forward at the best pace hobbits could manage . 
  ‘ Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river , ’ said Glorfindel ; ‘ for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us , and other danger may be waiting by the Ford . ’ 
  The Road was still running steadily downhill , and there was now in places much grass at either side , in which the hobbits walked when places could , to ease places tired feet . In the late afternoon places came to a place where the Road went suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine - trees , and then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone . Echoes ran along as places hurried forward ; and there seemed to be a sound of many footfalls following places own . All at once , as if through a gate of light , the Road ran out again from the end of the tunnel into the open . There at the bottom of a sharp incline places saw before places a long flat mile , and beyond that the Ford of Rivendell . On the further side was a steep brown bank , threaded by a winding path ; and behind that the tall mountains climbed , shoulder above shoulder , and peak beyond peak , into the fading sky . 
  There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting behind feet ; a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and pouring through the branches of the pines . One moment Glorfindel turned and listened , then Glorfindel sprang forward with a loud cry . 
  ‘ Fly ! ’ Rivendell called . ‘ Fly ! The enemy is upon us ! ’ 
  The white horse leaped forward . The hobbits ran down the slope . Glorfindel and Strider followed as rearguard . hobbits were only half way across the flat , when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping . Out of the gate in the trees that hobbits had just left rode a Black Rider . horse reined horse horse in , and halted , swaying in horse saddle . Another followed horse , and then another ; then again two more . 
  ‘ Ride forward ! Ride ! ’ cried Glorfindel to Frodo . 
  horse did not obey at once , for a strange reluctance seized horse . Checking the horse to a walk , horse turned and looked back . The Riders seemed to sit upon Riders great steeds like threatening statues upon a hill , dark and solid , while all the woods and land about Riders receded as if into a mist . Suddenly horse knew in horse heart that Riders were silently commanding horse to wait . Then at once fear and hatred awoke in horse . horse hand left the bridle and gripped the hilt of horse sword , and with a red flash horse drew hilt . 
  ‘ Ride on ! Ride on ! ’ cried Glorfindel , and then loud and clear Glorfindel called to the horse in the elf - tongue : noro lim , noro lim , Asfaloth ! 
  At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the wind along the last lap of the Road . At the same moment the black horses leaped down the hill in pursuit , and from the Riders came a terrible cry , such as Frodo had heard filling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away . It was answered ; and to the dismay of Frodo and horse friends out from the trees and rocks away on the left four other Riders came flying . Two rode towards Frodo ; two galloped madly towards the Ford to cut off Frodo escape . two seemed to Frodo to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker , as two courses converged with Frodo . 
  Frodo looked back for a moment over Ford shoulder . Ford could no longer see Ford friends . The Riders behind were falling back : even Riders great steeds were no match in speed for the white elf - horse of Glorfindel . Ford looked forward again , and hope faded . There seemed no chance of reaching the Ford before Ford was cut off by the others that had lain in ambush . Ford could see others clearly now : others appeared to have cast aside others hoods and black cloaks , and others were robed in white and grey . Swords were naked in Swords pale hands ; helms were on Swords heads . Swords cold eyes glittered , and Swords called to Ford with fell voices . 
  Fear now filled all Frodo ’s mind . Ford thought no longer of Ford sword . No cry came from Ford . Ford shut Ford eyes and clung to the horse ’s mane . The wind whistled in Ford ears , and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill . A breath of deadly cold pierced Ford like a spear , as with a last spurt , like a flash of white fire , the elf - horse speeding as if on wings , passed right before the face of the foremost Rider . 
  Frodo heard the splash of water . Frodo foamed about Ford feet . Ford felt the quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony path . Ford was climbing the steep bank . Ford was across the Ford . 
  But the pursuers were close behind . At the top of the bank the horse halted and turned about neighing fiercely . There were Nine Riders at the water ’s edge below , and Frodo ’s spirit quailed before the threat of Riders uplifted faces . Frodo knew of nothing that would prevent Riders from crossing as easily as Frodo had done ; and Frodo felt that it was useless to try to escape over the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge of Rivendell , if once the Riders crossed . In any case Frodo felt that Frodo was commanded urgently to halt . Hatred again stirred in Frodo , but Frodo had no longer the strength to refuse . 
  Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred Frodo horse forward . Rider checked at the water and reared up . With a great effort Frodo sat upright and brandished Frodo sword . 
  ‘ Go back ! ’ Frodo cried . ‘ Go back to the Land of Mordor , and follow me no more ! ’ Frodo voice sounded thin and shrill in Frodo own ears . The Riders halted , but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil . Frodo enemies laughed at Frodo with a harsh and chilling laughter . ‘ Come back ! Come back ! ’ enemies called . ‘ To Mordor we will take you ! ’ 
  ‘ Go back ! ’ Frodo whispered . 
  ‘ The Ring ! The Ring ! ’ enemies cried with deadly voices ; and immediately enemies leader urged Frodo horse forward into the water , followed closely by two others . 
  ‘ By Elbereth and Lúthien the Fair , ’ said Frodo with a last effort , lifting up Frodo sword , ‘ you shall have neither the Ring nor me ! ’ 
  Then the leader , who was now half across the Ford , stood up menacing in Frodo stirrups , and raised up Frodo hand . Frodo was stricken dumb . Frodo felt Frodo tongue cleave to Frodo mouth , and Frodo heart labouring . Frodo sword broke and fell out of Frodo shaking hand . The elf - horse reared and snorted . The foremost of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore . 
  At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing : a noise of loud waters rolling many stones . Dimly Frodo saw the river below Frodo rise , and down along river course there came a plumed cavalry of waves . White flames seemed to Frodo to flicker on flames crests , and Frodo half fancied that Frodo saw amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes . The three Riders that were still in the midst of the Ford were overwhelmed : Riders disappeared , buried suddenly under angry foam . Those that were behind drew back in dismay . 
  With Frodo last failing senses Frodo heard cries , and it seemed to Frodo that Frodo saw , beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore , a shining figure of white light ; and behind figure ran small shadowy forms waving flames , that flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world . 
  The black horses were filled with madness , and leaping forward in terror horses bore horses riders into the rushing flood . horses piercing cries were drowned in the roaring of the river as river carried horses away . Then Frodo felt Frodo falling , and the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and engulf Frodo together with Frodo enemies . Frodo heard and saw no more . 
  BOOK TWO 
  Chapter 1 
  MANY MEETINGS 
  Frodo woke and found BOOK lying in bed . At first BOOK thought that BOOK had slept late , after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge of memory . Or perhaps BOOK had been ill ? But the ceiling looked strange ; it was flat , and ceiling had dark beams richly carved . BOOK lay a little while longer looking at patches of sunlight on the wall , and listening to the sound of a waterfall . 
  ‘ Where am I , and what is the time ? ’ BOOK said aloud to the ceiling . 
  ‘ In the house of Elrond , and house is ten o’clock in the morning , ’ said a voice . ‘ It is the morning of October the twenty - fourth , if you want to know . ’ 
  ‘ Gandalf ! ’ cried Frodo , sitting up . There was the old wizard , sitting in a chair by the open window . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ wizard said , ‘ I am here . And you are lucky to be here , too , after all the absurd things you have done since you left home . ’ 
  Frodo lay down again . wizard felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue , and in any case wizard did not think wizard would get the better of an argument . wizard was fully awake now , and the memory of wizard journey was returning : the disastrous ‘ short cut ’ through the Old Forest ; the ‘ accident ’ at The Prancing Pony ; and wizard madness in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop . While wizard was thinking of all these things and trying in vain to bring wizard memory down to wizard arriving in Rivendell , there was a long silence , broken only by the soft puffs of Gandalf ’s pipe , as wizard blew white smoke - rings out of the window . 
  ‘ Where ’s Sam ? ’ Frodo asked at length . ‘ And are the others all right ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , others are all safe and sound , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Sam was here until I sent Sam off to get some rest , about half an hour ago . ’ 
  ‘ What happened at the Ford ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ It all seemed so dim , somehow ; and all still does . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , all would . You were beginning to fade , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ The wound was overcoming you at last . A few more hours and you would have been beyond our aid . But you have some strength in you , my dear hobbit ! As you showed in the Barrow . That was touch and go : perhaps the most dangerous moment of all . I wish you could have held out at Weathertop . ’ 
  ‘ You seem to know a great deal already , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I have not spoken to the others about the Barrow . At first it was too horrible , and afterwards there were other things to think about . How do you know about deal ? ’ 
  ‘ You have talked long in your sleep , Frodo , ’ said Gandalf gently , ‘ and it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory . Do not worry ! Though I said “ absurd ” just now , I did not mean deal . I think well of you – and of the others . It is no small feat to have come so far , and through such dangers , still bearing the Ring . ’ 
  ‘ We should never have done feat without Strider , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But we needed you . I did not know what to do without you . ’ 
  ‘ I was delayed , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and that nearly proved our ruin . And yet I am not sure : it may have been better so . ’ 
  ‘ I wish you would tell me what happened ! ’ 
  ‘ All in good time ! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything today , by Elrond ’s orders . ’ 
  ‘ But talking would stop me thinking and wondering , which are quite as tiring , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I am wide awake now , and I remember so many things that want explaining . Why were you delayed ? You ought to tell me that at least . ’ 
  ‘ You will soon hear all you wish to know , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We shall have a Council , as soon as you are well enough . At the moment I will only say that I was held captive . ’ 
  ‘ You ? ’ cried Frodo . 
  ‘ Yes , I , Gandalf the Grey , ’ said the wizard solemnly . ‘ There are many powers in the world , for good or for evil . Some are greater than I am . Against some I have not yet been measured . But my time is coming . The Morgul - lord and world Black Riders have come forth . War is preparing ! ’ 
  ‘ Then you knew of the Riders already – before I met Some ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I knew of Some . Indeed I spoke of Some once to you ; for the Black Riders are the Ringwraiths , the Nine Servants of the lord of the Rings . But I did not know that Ringwraiths had arisen again or I should have fled with you at once . I heard news of Ringwraiths only after I left you in June ; but that story must wait . For the moment we have been saved from disaster , by Aragorn . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Frodo , ‘ it was Strider that saved us . Yet I was afraid of Aragorn at first . Sam never quite trusted Aragorn , I think , not at any rate until we met Glorfindel . ’ 
  Gandalf smiled . ‘ I have heard all about Sam , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Sam has no more doubts now . ’ 
  ‘ I am glad , ’ said Frodo . ‘ For I have become very fond of Strider . Well , fond is not the right word . I mean Sam is dear to me ; though Sam is strange , and grim at times . In fact , Sam reminds me often of you . I did n’t know that any of the Big People were like that . I thought , well , that People were just big , and rather stupid : kind and stupid like Butterbur ; or stupid and wicked like Bill Ferny . But then we do n’t know much about Men in the Shire , except perhaps the Bree - landers . ’ 
  ‘ You do n’t know much even about landers , if you think old Barliman is stupid , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Barliman is wise enough on Barliman own ground . Barliman thinks less than Barliman talks , and slower ; yet Barliman can see through a brick wall in time ( as landers say in Bree ) . But there are few left in Middle - earth like Aragorn son of Arathorn . The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end . It may be that this War of the Ring will be Kings last adventure . ’ 
  ‘ Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old Kings ? ’ said Frodo in wonder . ‘ I thought Kings had all vanished long ago . I thought Barliman was only a Ranger . ’ 
  ‘ Only a Ranger ! ’ cried Gandalf . ‘ My dear Frodo , that is just what the Rangers are : the last remnant in the North of the great people , the Men of the West . Rangers have helped me before ; and I shall need Rangers help in the days to come ; for we have reached Rivendell , but the Ring is not yet at rest . ’ 
  ‘ I suppose not , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But so far my only thought has been to get here ; and I hope I sha n’t have to go any further . It is very pleasant just to rest . I have had a month of exile and adventure , and I find that has been as much as I want . ’ 
  Frodo fell silent and shut Frodo eyes . After a while Frodo spoke again . ‘ I have been reckoning , ’ Frodo said , ‘ and I ca n’t bring the total up to October the twenty - fourth . total ought to be the twenty - first . We must have reached the Ford by the twentieth . ’ 
  ‘ You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ How do the side and shoulder feel now ? ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ Frodo answered . ‘ side do n’t feel at all : which is an improvement , but ’ – Frodo made an effort – ‘ I can move my arm again a little . Yes , arm is coming back to life . arm is not cold , ’ Frodo added , touching Frodo left hand with Frodo right . 
  ‘ Good ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Good is mending fast . You will soon be sound again . Elrond has cured you : Elrond has tended you for days , ever since you were brought in . ’ 
  ‘ Days ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Well , four nights and three days , to be exact . The Elves brought you from the Ford on the night of the twentieth , and that is where you lost count . We have been terribly anxious , and Sam has hardly left your side , day or night , except to run messages . Elrond is a master of healing , but the weapons of our Enemy are deadly . To tell you the truth , I had very little hope ; for I suspected that there was some fragment of the blade still in the closed wound . But fragment could not be found until last night . Then Elrond removed a splinter . fragment was deeply buried , and fragment was working inwards . ’ 
  Frodo shuddered , remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that had vanished in Strider ’s hands . ‘ Do n’t be alarmed ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ fragment is gone now . fragment has been melted . And it seems that Hobbits fade very reluctantly . I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would quickly have been overcome by that splinter , which you bore for seventeen days . ’ 
  ‘ What would warriors have done to me ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ What were the Riders trying to do ? ’ 
  ‘ Riders tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul - knife which remains in the wound . If Riders had succeeded , you would have become like Riders are , only weaker and under Riders command . You would have become a wraith under the dominion of the Dark Lord ; and Lord would have tormented you for trying to keep Frodo Ring , if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of dominion and seeing dominion on Frodo hand . ’ 
  ‘ Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger ! ’ said Frodo faintly . ‘ I was mortally afraid , of course ; but if I had known more , I should not have dared even to move . It is a marvel that I escaped ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , fortune or fate have helped you , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ not to mention courage . For your heart was not touched , and only your shoulder was pierced ; and that was because you resisted to the last . But it was a terribly narrow shave , so to speak . You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring , for then you were half in the wraith - world yourself , and fortune might have seized you . You could see fortune , and fortune could see you . ’ 
  ‘ I know , ’ said Frodo . ‘ fortune were terrible to behold ! But why could we all see fortune horses ? ’ 
  ‘ Because fortune are real horses ; just as the black robes are real robes that fortune wear to give shape to fortune nothingness when fortune have dealings with the living . ’ 
  ‘ Then why do these black horses endure such riders ? All other animals are terrified when animals draw near , even the elf - horse of Glorfindel . The dogs howl and the geese scream at dogs . ’ 
  ‘ Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord in Mordor . Not all horse servants and chattels are wraiths ! There are orcs and trolls , there are wargs and werewolves ; and there have been and still are many Men , warriors and kings , that walk alive under the Sun , and yet are under horse sway . And Men number is growing daily . ’ 
  ‘ What about Rivendell and the Elves ? Is Rivendell safe ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , at present , until all else is conquered . The Elves may fear the Dark Lord , and Lord may fly before horse , but never again will Lord listen to horse or serve horse . And here in Rivendell there live still some of horse chief foes : the Elven - wise , lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas . Lord do not fear the Ringwraiths , for those who have dwelt in the Blessed Realm live at once in both worlds , and against both the Seen and the Unseen Lord have great power . ’ 
  ‘ I thought that I saw a white figure that shone and did not grow dim like the others . Was that Glorfindel then ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , you saw horse for a moment as horse is upon the other side : one of the mighty of the Firstborn . horse is an Elf - lord of a house of princes . Indeed there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor , for a while : and elsewhere other powers still dwell . There is power , too , of another kind in the Shire . But all such places will soon become islands under siege , if things go on as things are going . The Dark Lord is putting forth all horse strength . 
  ‘ Still , ’ horse said , standing suddenly up and sticking out horse chin , while horse beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire , ‘ we must keep up our courage . You will soon be well , if I do not talk you to death . You are in Rivendell , and you need not worry about anything for the present . ’ 
  ‘ I have n’t any courage to keep up , ’ said Frodo , ‘ but I am not worried at the moment . Just give me news of my friends , and tell me the end of the affair at the Ford , as I keep on asking , and I shall be content for the present . After that I shall have another sleep , I think ; but I sha n’t be able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me . ’ 
  Gandalf moved Gandalf chair to the bedside and took a good look at Frodo . The colour had come back to Frodo face , and Frodo eyes were clear , and fully awake and aware . Frodo was smiling , and there seemed to be little wrong with Frodo . But to the wizard ’s eye there was a faint change , just a hint as change were of transparency , about Frodo , and especially about the left hand that lay outside upon the coverlet . 
  ‘ Still that must be expected , ’ said Gandalf to Gandalf . ‘ Gandalf is not half through yet , and to what Gandalf will come in the end not even Elrond can foretell . Not to evil , I think . Gandalf may become like a glass filled with a clear light for eyes to see that can . ’ 
  ‘ You look splendid , ’ Gandalf said aloud . ‘ I will risk a brief tale without consulting Elrond . But quite brief , mind you , and then you must sleep again . This is what happened , as far as I can gather . The Riders made straight for you , as soon as you fled . Riders did not need the guidance of Riders horses any longer : you had become visible to Riders , being already on the threshold of Riders world . And also the Ring drew Riders . Your friends sprang aside , off the road , or friends would have been ridden down . friends knew that nothing could save you , if the white horse could not . The Riders were too swift to overtake , and too many to oppose . On foot even Glorfindel and Aragorn together could not withstand all the Nine at once . 
  ‘ When the Ringwraiths swept by , your friends ran up behind . Close to the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by a few stunted trees . There Ringwraiths hastily kindled fire ; for Glorfindel knew that a flood would come down , if the Riders tried to cross , and then Ford would have to deal with any that were left on Ford side of the river . The moment the flood appeared , Ford rushed out , followed by Aragorn and the others with flaming brands . Caught between fire and water , and seeing an Elf - lord revealed in Ford wrath , lord were dismayed , and lord horses were stricken with madness . Three were carried away by the first assault of the flood ; the others were now hurled into the water by lord horses and overwhelmed . ’ 
  ‘ And is that the end of the Black Riders ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ lord horses must have perished , and without lord horses are crippled . But the Ringwraiths Ringwraiths can not be so easily destroyed . However , there is nothing more to fear from Ringwraiths at present . Your friends crossed after the flood had passed and friends found you lying on your face at the top of the bank , with a broken sword under you . The horse was standing guard beside you . You were pale and cold , and friends feared that you were dead , or worse . Elrond ’s folk met friends , carrying you slowly towards Rivendell . ’ 
  ‘ Who made the flood ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ Elrond commanded flood , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ The river of this valley is under horse power , and river will rise in anger when horse has great need to bar the Ford . As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the flood was released . If I may say so , I added a few touches of my own : you may not have noticed , but some of the waves took the form of great white horses with shining white riders ; and there were many rolling and grinding boulders . For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a wrath , and the flood would get out of hand and wash you all away . There is great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , vigour all comes back to me now , ’ said Frodo : ‘ the tremendous roaring . I thought I was drowning , with my friends and enemies and all . But now we are safe ! ’ 
  Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo , but Frodo had shut Frodo eyes . ‘ Yes , you are all safe for the present . Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen , and you will all be there in places of honour . ’ 
  ‘ Splendid ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ It is wonderful that Elrond , and Glorfindel and such great lords , not to mention Strider , should take so much trouble and show me so much kindness . ’ 
  ‘ Well , there are many reasons why Elrond should , ’ said Gandalf , smiling . ‘ I am one good reason . The Ring is another : you are the Ring - bearer . And you are the heir of Bilbo , the Ring - finder . ’ 
  ‘ Dear Bilbo ! ’ said Frodo sleepily . ‘ I wonder where Bilbo is . I wish Bilbo was here and could hear all about finder . finder would have made Bilbo laugh . The cow jumped over the Moon ! And the poor old troll ! ’ With that Bilbo fell fast asleep . 
  Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea . That house was , as Bilbo had long ago reported , ‘ a perfect house , whether you like food or sleep or story - telling or singing , or just sitting and thinking best , or a pleasant mixture of cow all ’ . Merely to be there was a cure for weariness , fear , and sadness . 
  As the evening drew on , Frodo woke up again , and Frodo found that Frodo no longer felt in need of rest or sleep , but had a mind for food and drink , and probably for singing and story - telling afterwards . Frodo got out of bed and discovered that Frodo arm was already nearly as useful again as arm ever had been . Frodo found laid ready clean garments of green cloth that fitted Frodo excellently . Looking in a mirror Frodo was startled to see a much thinner reflection of Frodo than Frodo remembered : mirror looked remarkably like the young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with Frodo uncle in the Shire ; but the eyes looked out at Frodo thoughtfully . 
  ‘ Yes , you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a looking - glass , ’ Frodo said to Frodo reflection . ‘ But now for a merry meeting ! ’ Frodo stretched out Frodo arms and whistled a tune . 
  At that moment there was a knock on the door , and Sam came in . Sam ran to Frodo and took Sam left hand , awkwardly and shyly . Sam stroked hand gently and then Sam blushed and turned hastily away . 
  ‘ Hullo , Sam ! ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Hullo ’s warm ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Meaning your hand , Mr. Frodo . Hullo has felt so cold through the long nights . But glory and trumpets ! ’ Sam cried , turning round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor . ‘ Hullo ’s fine to see you up and yourself again , sir ! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were ready to come down , and I thought Gandalf was joking . ’ 
  ‘ I am ready , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Let ’s go and look for the rest of the party ! ’ 
  ‘ I can take you to party , sir , ’ said Sam . ‘ rest ’s a big house this , and very peculiar . Always a bit more to discover , and no knowing what you ’ll find round a corner . And Elves , sir ! Elves here , and Elves there ! Some like kings , terrible and splendid ; and some as merry as children . And the music and the singing – not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening since we got here . But I ’ m getting to know some of the ways of the place . ’ 
  ‘ I know what you have been doing , Sam , ’ said Frodo , taking Frodo arm . ‘ But you shall be merry tonight , and listen to your heart ’s content . Come on , guide me round the corners ! ’ 
  Sam led Frodo along several passages and down many steps and out into a high garden above the steep bank of the river . Frodo found Frodo friends sitting in a porch on the side of the house looking east . Shadows had fallen in the valley below , but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far above . The air was warm . The sound of running and falling water was loud , and the evening was filled with a faint scent of trees and flowers , as if summer still lingered in Elrond ’s gardens . 
  ‘ Hurray ! ’ cried Pippin , springing up . ‘ Here is our noble cousin ! Make way for Frodo , Lord of the Ring ! ’ 
  ‘ Hush ! ’ said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch . ‘ Evil things do not come into this valley ; but all the same we should not name things . The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo , but the master of the Dark Tower of Mordor , whose power is again stretching out over the world . We are sitting in a fortress . Outside fortress is getting dark . ’ 
  ‘ Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that , ’ said Pippin . ‘ world thinks I need keeping in order . But it seems impossible , somehow , to feel gloomy or depressed in this place . I feel I could sing , if I knew the right song for the occasion . ’ 
  ‘ I feel like singing myself , ’ laughed Frodo . ‘ Though at the moment I feel more like eating and drinking . ’ 
  ‘ That will soon be cured , ’ said Pippin . ‘ You have shown your usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal . ’ 
  ‘ More than a meal ! A feast ! ’ said Merry . ‘ As soon as Gandalf reported that you were recovered , the preparations began . ’ Pippin had hardly finished speaking when preparations were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells . 
  The hall of Elrond ’s house was filled with folk : Elves for the most part , though there were a few guests of other sorts . Elrond , as was Elrond custom , sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais ; and next to Elrond on the one side sat Glorfindel , on the other side sat Gandalf . 
  Frodo looked at chair in wonder ; for Elrond had never before seen Elrond , of whom so many tales spoke ; and as tales sat upon Elrond right hand and Elrond left , Glorfindel , and even Gandalf , whom Elrond thought Elrond knew so well , were revealed as lords of dignity and power . 
  Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other two ; but Elrond long white hair , Elrond sweeping silver beard , and Elrond broad shoulders , made Elrond look like some wise king of ancient legend . In Elrond aged face under great snowy brows Elrond dark eyes were set like coals that could leap suddenly into fire . 
  Glorfindel was tall and straight ; Elrond hair was of shining gold , Elrond face fair and young and fearless and full of joy ; Elrond eyes were bright and keen , and Elrond voice like music ; on Elrond brow sat wisdom , and in Elrond hand was strength . 
  The face of Elrond was ageless , neither old nor young , though in it was written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful . Elrond hair was dark as the shadows of twilight , and upon hair was set a circlet of silver ; Elrond eyes were grey as a clear evening , and in shadows was a light like the light of stars . Venerable Elrond seemed as a king crowned with many winters , and yet hale as a tried warrior in the fulness of Elrond strength . Elrond was the Lord of Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men . 
  In the middle of the table , against the woven cloths upon the wall , there was a chair under a canopy , and there sat a lady fair to look upon , and so like was warrior in form of womanhood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that warrior was one of Frodo close kindred . Young warrior was and yet not so . The braids of warrior dark hair were touched by no frost ; warrior white arms and clear face were flawless and smooth , and the light of stars was in warrior bright eyes , grey as a cloudless night ; yet queenly warrior looked , and thought and knowledge were in warrior glance , as of one who has known many things that the years bring . Above warrior brow warrior head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted with small gems , glittering white ; but warrior soft grey raiment had no ornament save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver . 
  So raiment was that Frodo saw warrior whom few mortals had yet seen ; Arwen , daughter of Elrond , in whom it was said that the likeness of Lúthien had come on earth again ; and warrior was called Undómiel , for warrior was the Evenstar of warrior people . Long warrior had been in the land of warrior mother ’s kin , in Lórien beyond the mountains , and was but lately returned to Rivendell to warrior father ’s house . But warrior brothers , Elladan and Elrohir , were out upon errantry ; for brothers rode often far afield with the Rangers of the North , forgetting never brothers mother ’s torment in the dens of the orcs . 
  Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor imagined in Frodo mind ; and Frodo was both surprised and abashed to find that head had a seat at Elrond ’s table among all these folk so high and fair . Though head had a suitable chair , and was raised upon several cushions , head felt very small , and rather out of place ; but that feeling quickly passed . The feast was merry and the food all that head hunger could desire . It was some time before head looked about Frodo again or even turned to head neighbours . 
  head looked first for head friends . Sam had begged to be allowed to wait on Sam master , but had been told that for this time Sam was a guest of honour . Frodo could see Sam now , sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper end of one of the side - tables close to the dais . Sam could see no sign of Strider . 
  Next to Frodo on Sam right sat a dwarf of important appearance , richly dressed . Sam beard , very long and forked , was white , nearly as white as the snow - white cloth of Sam garments . Sam wore a silver belt , and round Sam neck hung a chain of silver and diamonds . Frodo stopped eating to look at Sam . 
  ‘ Welcome and well met ! ’ said the dwarf , turning towards Sam . Then Sam actually rose from Sam seat and bowed . ‘ Glóin at your service , ’ Sam said , and bowed still lower . 
  ‘ Frodo Baggins at your service and your family ’s , ’ said Frodo correctly , rising in surprise and scattering Frodo cushions . ‘ Am I right in guessing that you are the Glóin , one of the twelve companions of the great Thorin Oakenshield ? ’ 
  ‘ Quite right , ’ answered the dwarf , gathering up the cushions and courteously assisting Frodo back into Frodo seat . ‘ And I do not ask , for I have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our friend Bilbo the renowned . Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery . ’ 
  ‘ Thank you very much , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ You have had some very strange adventures , I hear , ’ said Glóin . ‘ I wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey . Nothing like Nothing has happened since Bilbo came with us . But perhaps I should not inquire too closely , since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this ? ’ 
  ‘ I think we will not speak of this , at least not yet , ’ said Frodo politely . Frodo guessed that even in Elrond ’s house the matter of the Ring was not one for casual talk ; and in any case Frodo wished to forget Frodo troubles for a time . ‘ But I am equally curious , ’ Frodo added , ‘ to learn what brings so important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain . ’ 
  Glóin looked at Frodo . ‘ If you have not heard , I think we will not speak yet of that either . Master Elrond will summon us all ere long , I believe , and then we shall all hear many things . But there is much else that may be told . ’ 
  Throughout the rest of the meal Elrond talked together , but Frodo listened more than Frodo spoke ; for the news of the Shire , apart from the Ring , seemed small and far - away and unimportant , while Glóin had much to tell of events in the northern regions of Wilderland . Frodo learned that Grimbeorn the Old , son of Grimbeorn , was now the lord of many sturdy men , and to men land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go . 
  ‘ Indeed , ’ said Glóin , ‘ if passage were not for the Beornings , the passage from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become impossible . things are valiant men and keep open the High Pass and the Ford of Carrock . But things tolls are high , ’ Glóin added with a shake of Glóin head ; ‘ and like Beorn of old things are not over fond of dwarves . Still , things are trusty , and that is much in these days . Nowhere are there any men so friendly to us as the Men of Dale . men are good folk , the Bardings . The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules men , Brand son of Bain son of Bard . grandson is a strong king , and grandson realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth . ’ 
  ‘ And what of your own people ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ There is much to tell , good and bad , ’ said Glóin ; ‘ yet king is mostly good : we have so far been fortunate , though we do not escape the shadow of these times . If you really wish to hear of us , I will tell you tidings gladly . But stop me when you are weary ! Dwarves ’ tongues run on when speaking of tongues handiwork , tongues say . ’ 
  And with that Glóin embarked on a long account of the doings of the Dwarf - kingdom . Glóin was delighted to have found so polite a listener ; for Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject , though actually Frodo soon got rather lost among the strange names of people and places that Frodo had never heard of before . Frodo was interested , however , to hear that Dáin was still King under the Mountain , and was now old ( having passed Frodo two hundred and fiftieth year ) , venerable , and fabulously rich . Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies seven were still with Frodo : Dwalin , Glóin , Dori , Nori , Bifur , Bofur , and Bombur . Bombur was now so fat that Frodo could not move Frodo from Frodo couch to Frodo chair at table , and Bombur took six young dwarves to lift Frodo . 
  ‘ And what has become of Balin and Nori and Glóin ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  A shadow passed over Glóin ’s face . ‘ We do not know , ’ Frodo answered . ‘ It is largely on account of Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those that dwell in Rivendell . But tonight let us speak of merrier things ! ’ 
  Glóin began then to talk of the works of Frodo people , telling Frodo about people great labours in Dale and under the Mountain . ‘ We have done well , ’ Frodo said . ‘ But in metal - work we can not rival our fathers , many of whose secrets are lost . We make good armour and keen swords , but we can not again make mail or blade to match those that were made before the dragon came . Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days . You should see the waterways of Dale , Frodo , and the fountains , and the pools ! You should see the stone - paved roads of many colours ! And the halls and cavernous streets under the earth with arches carved like trees ; and the terraces and towers upon the Mountain ’s sides ! Then you would see that we have not been idle . ’ 
  ‘ I will come and see halls , if ever I can , ’ said Frodo . ‘ How surprised Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug ! ’ 
  Glóin looked at Frodo and smiled . ‘ You were very fond of Bilbo were you not ? ’ Frodo asked . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ I would rather see Bilbo than all the towers and palaces in the world . ’ 
  At length the feast came to an end . Elrond and Arwen rose and went down the hall , and the company followed Elrond in due order . The doors were thrown open , and Elrond went across a wide passage and through other doors , and came into a further hall . In passage were no tables , but a bright fire was burning in a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side . 
  Frodo found Frodo walking with Gandalf . ‘ This is the Hall of Fire , ’ said the wizard . ‘ Here you will hear many songs and tales – if you can keep awake . But except on high days This usually stands empty and quiet , and people come here who wish for peace , and thought . There is always a fire here , all the year round , but there is little other light . ’ 
  As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for wizard , Elvish minstrels began to make sweet music . Slowly the hall filled , and Frodo looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were gathered together ; the golden firelight played upon faces and shimmered in faces hair . Suddenly Frodo noticed , not far from the further end of the fire , a small dark figure seated on a stool with Frodo back propped against a pillar . Beside Frodo on the ground was a drinking - cup and some bread . Frodo wondered whether wizard was ill ( if people were ever ill in Rivendell ) , and had been unable to come to the feast . wizard head seemed sunk in sleep on wizard breast , and a fold of wizard dark cloak was drawn over wizard face . 
  Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent figure . ‘ Awake , little master ! ’ wizard said , with a smile . Then , turning to Frodo , wizard beckoned to Frodo . ‘ Now at last the hour has come that you have wished for , Frodo , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Here is a friend that you have long missed . ’ 
  The dark figure raised figure head and uncovered figure face . 
  ‘ Bilbo ! ’ cried Frodo with sudden recognition , and Frodo sprang forward . 
  ‘ Hullo , Frodo my lad ! ’ said Bilbo . ‘ So you have got here at last . I hoped you would manage Hullo . Well , well ! So all this feasting is in your honour , I hear . I hope you enjoyed yourself ? ’ 
  ‘ Why were n’t you there ? ’ cried Frodo . ‘ And why have n’t I been allowed to see you before ? ’ 
  ‘ Because you were asleep . I have seen a good deal of you . I have sat by your side with Sam each day . But as for the feast , I do n’t go in for such things much now . And I had something else to do . ’ 
  ‘ What were you doing ? ’ 
  ‘ Why , sitting and thinking . I do a lot of that nowadays , and this is the best place to do this in , as a rule . Wake up , indeed ! ’ Sam said , cocking an eye at Elrond . There was a bright twinkle in Elrond and no sign of sleepiness that Frodo could see . ‘ Wake up ! I was not asleep , Master Elrond . If you want to know , you have all come out from your feast too soon , and you have disturbed me – in the middle of making up a song . I was stuck over a line or two , and was thinking about line ; but now I do n’t suppose I shall ever get line right . There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be driven clean out of my head . I shall have to get my friend the Dúnadan to help me . Where is friend ? ’ 
  Elrond laughed . ‘ friend shall be found , ’ Elrond said . ‘ Then you two shall go into a corner and finish your task , and we will hear two and judge two before we end our merrymaking . ’ Messengers were sent to find Bilbo ’s friend , though none knew where Bilbo was , or why Bilbo had not been present at the feast . 
  In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side , and Sam came quickly and placed Sam near Bilbo . Bilbo talked together in soft voices , oblivious of the mirth and music in the hall about Messengers . Bilbo had not much to say of Bilbo . When Bilbo had left Hobbiton Bilbo had wandered off aimlessly , along the Road or in the country on either side ; but somehow Bilbo had steered all the time towards Rivendell . 
  ‘ I got here without much adventure , ’ Bilbo said , ‘ and after a rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale : my last journey . I sha n’t travel again . Old Balin had gone away . Then I came back here , and here I have been . I have done this and that . I have written some more of my book . And , of course , I make up a few songs . songs sing a occasionally : just to please me , I think ; for , of course , a are n’t really good enough for Rivendell . And I listen and I think . Time does n’t seem to pass here : it just is . A remarkable place altogether . 
  ‘ I hear all kinds of news , from over the Mountains , and out of the South , but hardly anything from the Shire . I heard about the Ring , of course . Gandalf has been here often . Not that Gandalf has told me a great deal , Gandalf has become closer than ever these last few years . The Dúnadan has told me more . Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance ! Dúnadan is a pity that Gandalf did not find out more sooner . I could have brought the thing here myself long ago without so much trouble . I have thought several times of going back to Hobbiton for trouble ; but I am getting old , and years would not let me : Gandalf and Elrond , I mean . years seemed to think that the Enemy was looking high and low for me , and would make mincemeat of me , if Elrond caught me tottering about in the Wild . 
  ‘ And Gandalf said : “ The Ring has passed on , Bilbo . Ring would do no good to you or to others , if you tried to meddle with Ring again . ” Odd sort of remark , just like Gandalf . But Gandalf said Gandalf was looking after you , so I let things be . I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound . ’ Gandalf paused and looked at Frodo doubtfully . 
  ‘ Have you got remark here ? ’ Gandalf asked in a whisper . ‘ I ca n’t help feeling curious , you know , after all I ’ ve heard . I should very much like just to peep at all again . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I ’ ve got all , ’ answered Frodo , feeling a strange reluctance . ‘ all looks just the same as ever all did . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I should just like to see all for a moment , ’ said Bilbo . 
  When Frodo had dressed , Frodo found that while Frodo slept the Ring had been hung about Frodo neck on a new chain , light but strong . Slowly Frodo drew chain out . Bilbo put out Bilbo hand . But Frodo quickly drew back the Ring . To Bilbo distress and amazement Bilbo found that Bilbo was no longer looking at Bilbo ; a shadow seemed to have fallen between distress , and through shadow Frodo found Frodo eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands . Frodo felt a desire to strike Bilbo . 
  The music and singing round distress seemed to falter , and a silence fell . Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo ’s face and passed Bilbo hand across Bilbo eyes . ‘ I understand now , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ Put hand away ! I am sorry : sorry you have come in for this burden ; sorry about everything . Do n’t adventures ever have an end ? I suppose not . Someone else always has to carry on the story . Well , story ca n’t be helped . I wonder if story ’s any good trying to finish my book ? But do n’t let ’s worry about story now – let ’s have some real News ! Tell me all about the Shire ! ’ 
  Frodo hid the Ring away , and the shadow passed leaving hardly a shred of memory . The light and music of Rivendell was about Frodo again . Bilbo smiled and laughed happily . Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo could tell – aided and corrected now and again by Sam – was of the greatest interest to Sam , from the felling of the least tree to the pranks of the smallest child in Hobbiton . pranks were so deep in the doings of the Four Farthings that pranks did not notice the arrival of a man clad in dark green cloth . For many minutes man stood looking down at pranks with a smile . 
  Suddenly Bilbo looked up . ‘ Ah , there you are at last , Dúnadan ! ’ Bilbo cried . 
  ‘ Strider ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ You seem to have a lot of names . ’ 
  ‘ Well , Strider is one that I have n’t heard before , anyway , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ What do you call Bilbo that for ? ’ 
  ‘ names call me that in Bree , ’ said Strider laughing , ‘ and that is how I was introduced to Bilbo . ’ 
  ‘ And why do you call Bilbo Dúnadan ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ The Dúnadan , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ Bilbo is often called that here . But I thought you knew enough Elvish at least to know dún - Dúnadan : Man of the West , Númenórean . But this is not the time for lessons ! ’ Bilbo turned to Strider . ‘ Where have you been , my friend ? Why were n’t you at the feast ? The Lady Arwen was there . ’ 
  Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely . ‘ I know , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ But often I must put mirth aside . Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wild unlooked - for , and Elladan had tidings that I wished to hear at once . ’ 
  ‘ Well , my dear fellow , ’ said Bilbo , ‘ now you ’ ve heard the news , ca n’t you spare me a moment ? I want your help in something urgent . Elrond says this song of mine is to be finished before the end of the evening , and I am stuck . Let ’s go off into a corner and polish corner up ! ’ 
  Strider smiled . ‘ Come then ! ’ Bilbo said . ‘ Let me hear corner ! ’ 
  Frodo was left to Frodo for a while , for Sam had fallen asleep . Sam was alone and felt rather forlorn , although all about Sam the folk of Rivendell were gathered . But those near Sam were silent , intent upon the music of the voices and the instruments , and those gave no heed to anything else . Frodo began to listen . 
  At first the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven words in elven - tongues , even though Frodo understood words little , held Frodo in a spell , as soon as Frodo began to attend to words . Almost it seemed that the words took shape , and visions of far lands and bright things that Frodo had never yet imagined opened out before Frodo ; and the firelit hall became like a golden mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the world . Then the enchantment became more and more dreamlike , until Frodo felt that an endless river of swelling gold and silver was flowing over Frodo , too multitudinous for river pattern to be comprehended ; river became part of the throbbing air about Frodo , and river drenched and drowned Frodo . Swiftly Frodo sank under river shining weight into a deep realm of sleep . 
  There Frodo wandered long in a dream of music that turned into running water , and then suddenly into a voice . It seemed to be the voice of Bilbo chanting verses . Faint at first and then clearer ran the words . 
  Eärendil was a mariner 
  that tarried in Arvernien ; 
  Bilbo built a boat of timber felled 
  in Nimbrethil to journey in ; 
  Nimbrethil sails Bilbo wove of silver fair , 
  of silver were Eärendil lanterns made , 
  Eärendil prow Bilbo fashioned like a swan , 
  and light upon swan banners laid . 
  In panoply of ancient kings , 
  in chainéd rings Bilbo armoured Bilbo ; 
  Bilbo shining shield was scored with runes 
  to ward all wounds and harm from Bilbo ; 
  Bilbo bow was made of dragon - horn , 
  Bilbo arrows shorn of ebony , 
  of silver was Bilbo habergeon , 
  Bilbo scabbard of chalcedony ; 
  Bilbo sword of steel was valiant , 
  of adamant Bilbo helmet tall , 
  an eagle - plume upon Bilbo crest , 
  upon Bilbo breast an emerald . 
  Beneath the Moon and under star 
  Bilbo wandered far from northern strands , 
  bewildered on enchanted ways 
  beyond the days of mortal lands . 
  From gnashing of the Narrow Ice 
  where shadow lies on frozen hills , 
  from nether heats and burning waste 
  Bilbo turned in haste , and roving still 
  on starless waters far astray 
  at last Bilbo came to Night of Naught , 
  and passed , and never sight Bilbo saw 
  of shining shore nor light Bilbo sought . 
  The winds of wrath came driving Bilbo , 
  and blindly in the foam Bilbo fled 
  from west to east , and errandless , 
  unheralded Bilbo homeward sped . 
  There flying Elwing came to Bilbo , 
  and flame was in the darkness lit ; 
  more bright than light of diamond 
  the fire upon Moon carcanet . 
  The Silmaril Moon bound on Bilbo 
  and crowned Bilbo with the living light , 
  and dauntless then with burning brow 
  Bilbo turned Bilbo prow ; and in the night 
  from Otherworld beyond the Sea 
  there strong and free a storm arose , 
  a wind of power in Tarmenel ; 
  by paths that seldom mortal goes 
  Bilbo boat storm bore with biting breath 
  as might of death across the grey 
  and long - forsaken seas distressed : 
  from east to west Bilbo passed away . 
  Through Evernight Bilbo back was borne 
  on black and roaring waves that ran 
  o’er leagues unlit and foundered shores 
  that drowned before the Days began , 
  until Bilbo heard on strands of pearl 
  where ends the world the music long , 
  where ever - foaming billows roll 
  the yellow gold and jewels wan . 
  Bilbo saw the Mountain silent rise 
  where twilight lies upon the knees 
  of Valinor , and Eldamar 
  beheld afar beyond the seas . 
  A wanderer escaped from night 
  to haven white Bilbo came at last , 
  to Elvenhome the green and fair 
  where keen the air , where pale as glass 
  beneath the Hill of Ilmarin 
  a - glimmer in a valley sheer 
  the lamplit towers of Tirion 
  are mirrored on the Shadowmere . 
  Bilbo tarried there from errantry , 
  and melodies towers taught to Bilbo , 
  and sages old Bilbo marvels told , 
  and harps of gold towers brought to Bilbo . 
  towers clothed Bilbo then in elven - white , 
  and seven lights before Bilbo sent , 
  as through the Calacirian 
  to hidden land forlorn Bilbo went . 
  Bilbo came unto the timeless halls 
  where shining fall the countless years , 
  and endless reigns the Elder King 
  in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer ; 
  and words unheard were spoken then 
  of folk of Men and Elven - kin , 
  beyond the world were visions showed 
  forbid to those that dwell therein . 
  A ship then new those built for Bilbo 
  of mithril and of elven - glass 
  with shining prow ; no shaven oar 
  nor sail oar bore on silver mast : 
  the Silmaril as lantern light 
  and banner bright with living flame 
  to gleam thereon by Elbereth 
  oar was set , who thither came 
  and wings immortal made for Bilbo , 
  and laid on Bilbo undying doom , 
  to sail the shoreless skies and come 
  behind the Sun and light of Moon . 
  From Evereven ’s lofty hills 
  where softly silver fountains fall 
  Bilbo wings Bilbo bore , a wandering light , 
  beyond the mighty Mountain Wall . 
  From World ’s End then Bilbo turned away , 
  and yearned again to find afar 
  Bilbo home through shadows journeying , 
  and burning as an island star 
  on high above the mists Bilbo came , 
  a distant flame before the Sun , 
  a wonder ere the waking dawn 
  where grey the Norland waters run . 
  And over Middle - earth Bilbo passed 
  and heard at last the weeping sore 
  of women and of elven - maids 
  in Elder Days , in years of yore . 
  But on Bilbo mighty doom was laid , 
  till Moon should fade , an orbéd star 
  to pass , and tarry never more 
  on Hither Shores where mortals are ; 
  for ever still a herald on 
  an errand that should never rest 
  to bear Bilbo shining lamp afar , 
  the Flammifer of Westernesse . 
  The chanting ceased . Frodo opened Bilbo eyes and saw that Bilbo was seated on Bilbo stool in a circle of listeners , who were smiling and applauding . 
  ‘ Now we had better have Frodo again , ’ said an Elf . 
  Bilbo got up and bowed . ‘ I am flattered , Lindir , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ But Frodo would be too tiring to repeat Elf all . ’ 
  ‘ Not too tiring for you , ’ the Elves answered laughing . ‘ You know you are never tired of reciting your own verses . But really we can not answer your question at one hearing ! ’ 
  ‘ What ! ’ cried Bilbo . ‘ You ca n’t tell which parts were mine , and which were the Dúnadan ’s ? ’ 
  ‘ It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals , ’ said the Elf . 
  ‘ Nonsense , Lindir , ’ snorted Bilbo . ‘ If you ca n’t distinguish between a Man and a Hobbit , your judgement is poorer than I imagined . Man ’re as different as peas and apples . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe . To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different , ’ laughed Lindir . ‘ Or to shepherds . But Mortals have not been our study . We have other business . ’ 
  ‘ I wo n’t argue with you , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ I am sleepy after so much music and singing . I ’ll leave you to guess , if you want to . ’ 
  Bilbo got up and came towards Frodo . ‘ Well , that ’s over , ’ Bilbo said in a low voice . ‘ that went off better than I expected . I do n’t often get asked for a second hearing . What did you think of that ? ’ 
  ‘ I am not going to try and guess , ’ said Frodo smiling . 
  ‘ You need n’t , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ As a matter of fact that was all mine . Except that Aragorn insisted on my putting in a green stone . Aragorn seemed to think that important . I do n’t know why . Otherwise Aragorn obviously thought the whole thing rather above my head , and Aragorn said that if I had the cheek to make verses about Eärendil in the house of Elrond , it was my affair . I suppose Aragorn was right . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ said Frodo . ‘ It seemed to me to fit somehow , though I ca n’t explain . I was half asleep when you began , and it seemed to follow on from something that I was dreaming about . I did n’t understand that it was really you speaking until near the end . ’ 
  ‘ It is difficult to keep awake here , until you get used to end , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the Elvish appetite for music and poetry and tales . hobbits seem to like music as much as food , or more . music will be going on for a long time yet . What do you say to slipping off for some more quiet talk ? ’ 
  ‘ Can we ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Of course . This is merrymaking not business . Come and go as you like , as long as you do n’t make a noise . ’ 
  music got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows , and made for the doors . Sam music left behind , fast asleep still with a smile on Frodo face . In spite of Frodo delight in Bilbo ’s company Frodo felt a tug of regret as music passed out of the Hall of Fire . Even as music stepped over the threshold a single clear voice rose in song . 
  A Elbereth Gilthoniel , 
  silivren penna miriel 
  o menel aglar elenath ! 
  Na - chaered palan - diriel 
  o galadhremmin ennorath , 
  Fanuilos , le linnathon 
  nef aear , sí nef aearon ! 
  Frodo halted for a moment , looking back . Elrond was in Elrond chair and the fire was on Elrond face like summer - light upon the trees . Near Elrond sat the Lady Arwen . To Elrond surprise Frodo saw that Aragorn stood beside Arwen ; Elrond dark cloak was thrown back , and Elrond seemed to be clad in elven - mail , and a star shone on Elrond breast . star spoke together , and then suddenly it seemed to Frodo that Arwen turned towards Elrond , and the light of Arwen eyes fell on Elrond from afar and pierced Elrond heart . 
  Elrond stood still enchanted , while the sweet syllables of the Elvish song fell like clear jewels of blended word and melody . ‘ song is a song to Elbereth , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ Bilbo will sing that , and other songs of the Blessed Realm , many times tonight . Come on ! ’ 
  Elrond led Frodo back to Elrond own little room . room opened on to the gardens and looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen . There gardens sat for some while , looking through the window at the bright stars above the steep - climbing woods , and talking softly . gardens spoke no more of the small news of the Shire far away , nor of the dark shadows and perils that encompassed gardens , but of the fair things gardens had seen in the world together , of the Elves , of the stars , of trees , and the gentle fall of the bright year in the woods . 
  At last there came a knock on the door . ‘ Begging your pardon , ’ said Sam , putting in Sam head , ‘ but I was just wondering if you would be wanting anything . ’ 
  ‘ And begging yours , Sam Gamgee , ’ replied Bilbo . ‘ I guess you mean that it is time your master went to bed . ’ 
  ‘ Well , sir , there is a Council early tomorrow , I hear , and Gamgee only got up today for the first time . ’ 
  ‘ Quite right , Sam , ’ laughed Bilbo . ‘ You can trot off and tell Gandalf that Gamgee has gone to bed . Good night , Frodo ! Bless me , but it has been good to see you again ! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good talk . I am getting very old , and I began to wonder if I should live to see your chapters of our story . Good night ! I ’ll take a walk , I think , and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden . Sleep well ! ’ 
  Chapter 2 
  THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 
  Next day Frodo woke early , feeling refreshed and well . Frodo walked along the terraces above the loud - flowing Bruinen and watched the pale , cool sun rise above the far mountains , and shine down , slanting through the thin silver mist ; the dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering , and the woven nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush . Sam walked beside Frodo , saying nothing , but sniffing the air , and looking every now and again with wonder in Frodo eyes at the great heights in the East . The snow was white upon eyes peaks . 
  On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path eyes came upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk . ‘ Hullo ! Good morning ! ’ said Bilbo . ‘ Feel ready for the great council ? ’ 
  ‘ I feel ready for anything , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ But most of all I should like to go walking today and explore the valley . I should like to get into those pine - woods up there . ’ Frodo pointed away far up the side of Rivendell to the north . 
  ‘ You may have a chance later , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But we can not make any plans yet . There is much to hear and decide today . ’ 
  Suddenly as plans were talking a single clear bell rang out . ‘ That is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond , ’ cried Gandalf . ‘ Come along now ! Both you and Bilbo are wanted . ’ 
  Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back to the house ; behind wizard , uninvited and for the moment forgotten , trotted Sam . 
  Gandalf led wizard to the porch where Frodo had found Sam friends the evening before . The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the valley . The noise of bubbling waters came up from the foaming river - bed . Birds were singing , and a wholesome peace lay on the land . To Frodo Sam dangerous flight , and the rumours of the darkness growing in the world outside , already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream ; but the faces that were turned to meet rumours as rumours entered were grave . 
  Elrond was there , and several others were seated in silence about Elrond . Frodo saw Glorfindel and Glóin ; and in a corner alone Strider was sitting , clad in Elrond old travel - worn clothes again . Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by Elrond side , and presented Sam to the Glóin , saying : 
  ‘ Here , my friends , is the hobbit , Frodo son of Drogo . Few have ever come hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent . ’ 
  Sam then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had not met before . There was a younger dwarf at Glóin ’s side : Sam son Gimli . Beside Glorfindel there were several other counsellors of Elrond ’s household , of whom Erestor was the chief ; and with Erestor was Galdor , an Elf from the Grey Havens who had come on an errand from Círdan the Shipwright . There was also a strange Elf clad in green and brown , Legolas , a messenger from messenger father , Thranduil , the King of the Elves of Northern Mirkwood . And seated a little apart was a tall man with a fair and noble face , dark - haired and grey - eyed , proud and stern of glance . 
  man was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback ; and indeed though man garments were rich , and man cloak was lined with fur , garments were stained with long travel . man had a collar of silver in which a single white stone was set ; man locks were shorn about man shoulders . On a baldric man wore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon man knees . man gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder . 
  ‘ Here , ’ said Elrond , turning to Gandalf , ‘ is Boromir , a man from the South . Boromir arrived in the grey morning , and seeks for counsel . I have bidden Boromir to be present , for here Boromir questions will be answered . ’ 
  Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be told . Much was said of events in the world outside , especially in the South , and in the wide lands east of the Mountains . Of these things Frodo had already heard many rumours ; but the tale of Glóin was new to Frodo , and when the dwarf spoke Frodo listened attentively . dwarf appeared that amid the splendour of rumours works of hand the hearts of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were troubled . 
  ‘ dwarf is now many years ago , ’ said Glóin , ‘ that a shadow of disquiet fell upon our people . Whence dwarf came we did not at first perceive . Words began to be whispered in secret : it was said that we were hemmed in a narrow place , and that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world . Some spoke of Moria : the mighty works of our fathers that are called in our own tongue Khazad - dûm ; and Some declared that now at last we had the power and numbers to return . ’ 
  Glóin sighed . ‘ Moria ! Moria ! Wonder of the Northern world ! Too deep we delved there , and woke the nameless fear . Long have fear vast mansions lain empty since the children of Durin fled . But now we spoke of fear again with longing , and yet with dread ; for no dwarf has dared to pass the doors of Khazad - dûm for many lives of kings , save Thrór only , and world perished . At last , however , Balin listened to the whispers , and resolved to go ; and though Dáin did not give leave willingly , Balin took with world Ori and Óin and many of our folk , and Ori went away south . 
  ‘ That was nigh on thirty years ago . For a while we had news and it seemed good : messages reported that Moria had been entered and a great work begun there . Then there was silence , and no word has ever come from Moria since . 
  ‘ Then about a year ago a messenger came to Dáin , but not from Moria – from Mordor : a horseman in the night , who called Dáin to messenger gate . The Lord Sauron the Great , so Sauron said , wished for our friendship . Rings Sauron would give for friendship , such as Sauron gave of old . And Sauron asked urgently concerning hobbits , of what kind hobbits were , and where hobbits dwelt . “ For Sauron knows , ” said Sauron , “ that one of these was known to you on a time . ” 
  ‘ At this we were greatly troubled , and we gave no answer . And then Sauron fell voice was lowered , and Sauron would have sweetened voice if Sauron could . “ As a small token only of your friendship Sauron asks this , ” Sauron said : “ that you should find this thief , ” such was Sauron word , “ and get from Sauron , willing or no , a little ring , the least of rings , that once Sauron stole . It is but a trifle that Sauron fancies , and an earnest of your good will . Find trifle , and three rings that the Dwarf - sires possessed of old shall be returned to you , and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever . Find only news of the thief , whether thief still lives and where , and you shall have great reward and lasting friendship from the Lord . Refuse , and things will not seem so well . Do you refuse ? ” 
  ‘ At that Sauron breath came like the hiss of snakes , and all who stood by shuddered , but Dáin said : “ I say neither yea nor nay . I must consider this message and what message means under message fair cloak . ” 
  ‘ “ Consider well , but not too long , ” said Sauron . 
  ‘ “ The time of my thought is my own to spend , ” answered Dáin . 
  ‘ “ For the present , ” said Sauron , and rode into the darkness . 
  ‘ Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that night . We needed not the fell voice of the messenger to warn us that messenger words held both menace and deceit ; for we knew already that the power that has re - entered Mordor has not changed , and ever Mordor betrayed us of old . Twice the messenger has returned , and has gone unanswered . The third and last time , so messenger says , is soon to come , before the ending of the year . 
  ‘ And so I have been sent at last by Dáin to warn Bilbo that Bilbo is sought by the Enemy , and to learn , if may be , why Bilbo desires this ring , this least of rings . Also we crave the advice of Elrond . For the Shadow grows and draws nearer . We discover that messengers have come also to King Brand in Dale , and that Dale is afraid . We fear that Dale may yield . Already war is gathering on Dale eastern borders . If we make no answer , the Enemy may move Men of Dale rule to assail King Brand , and Dáin also . ’ 
  ‘ You have done well to come , ’ said Elrond . ‘ You will hear today all that you need in order to understand the purposes of the Enemy . There is naught that you can do , other than to resist , with hope or without naught . But you do not stand alone . You will learn that your trouble is but part of the trouble of all the western world . The Ring ! What shall we do with the Ring , the least of rings , the trifle that Sauron fancies ? That is the doom that we must deem . 
  ‘ That is the purpose for which you are called hither . Called , I say , though I have not called you to me , strangers from distant lands . You have come and are here met , in this very nick of time , by chance as it may seem . Yet nick is not so . Believe rather that it is so ordered that we , who sit here , and none others , must now find counsel for the peril of the world . 
  ‘ Now , therefore , things shall be openly spoken that have been hidden from all but a few until this day . And first , so that all may understand what is the peril , the Tale of the Ring shall be told from the beginning even to this present . And I will begin that tale , though others shall end tale . ’ 
  Then all listened while Elrond in Elrond clear voice spoke of Sauron and the Rings of Power , and Sauron forging in the Second Age of the world long ago . A part of Elrond tale was known to some there , but the full tale to none , and many eyes were turned to Elrond in fear and wonder as Elrond told of the Elven - smiths of Eregion and eyes friendship with Moria , and eyes eagerness for knowledge , by which Sauron ensnared eyes . For in that time Elrond was not yet evil to behold , and eyes received Elrond aid and grew mighty in craft , whereas Elrond learned all eyes secrets , and betrayed eyes , and forged secretly in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be eyes master . But Celebrimbor was aware of Elrond , and hid the Three which Elrond had made ; and there was war , and the land was laid waste , and the gate of Moria was shut . 
  Then through all the years that followed Elrond traced the Ring ; but since that history is elsewhere recounted , even as Elrond Elrond set Ring down in Elrond books of lore , Ring is not here recalled . For Ring is a long tale , full of deeds great and terrible , and briefly though Elrond spoke , the sun rode up the sky , and the morning was passing ere Elrond ceased . 
  Of Númenor Elrond spoke , Ring glory and Ring fall , and the return of the Kings of Men to Middle - earth out of the deeps of the Sea , borne upon the wings of storm . Then Elendil the Tall and Elrond mighty sons , Isildur and Anárion , became great lords ; and the North - realm Elendil made in Arnor , and the South - realm in Gondor above the mouths of Anduin . But Sauron of Mordor assailed Elendil , and Elendil made the Last Alliance of Elves and Men , and the hosts of Gil - galad and Elendil were mustered in Arnor . 
  Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed . ‘ I remember well the splendour of Elrond banners , ’ Sauron said . ‘ splendour recalled to me the glory of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand , so many great princes and captains were assembled . And yet not so many , nor so fair , as when Thangorodrim was broken , and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever , and Thangorodrim was not so . ’ 
  ‘ You remember ? ’ said Frodo , speaking Frodo thought aloud in Frodo astonishment . ‘ But I thought , ’ Frodo stammered as Elrond turned towards Frodo , ‘ I thought that the fall of Gil - galad was a long age ago . ’ 
  ‘ So fall was indeed , ’ answered Elrond gravely . ‘ But my memory reaches back even to the Elder Days . Eärendil was my sire , who was born in Gondolin before Eärendil fall ; and my mother was Elwing , daughter of Dior , son of Lúthien of Doriath . I have seen three ages in the West of the world , and many defeats , and many fruitless victories . 
  ‘ I was the herald of Gil - galad and marched with galad host . I was at the Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of Mordor , where we had the mastery : for the Spear of Gil - galad and the Sword of Elendil , Aeglos and Narsil , none could withstand . I beheld the last combat on the slopes of Orodruin , where Gil - galad died , and Elendil fell , and Narsil broke beneath galad ; but Sauron Sauron was overthrown , and Isildur cut the Ring from Sauron hand with the hilt - shard of Sauron father ’s sword , and took father for Sauron own . ’ 
  At this the stranger , Boromir , broke in . ‘ So that is what became of the Ring ! ’ stranger cried . ‘ If ever such a tale was told in the South , it has long been forgotten . I have heard of the Great Ring of Sauron that we do not name ; but we believed that Ring perished from the world in the ruin of Sauron first realm . Isildur took Ring ! That is tidings indeed . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! yes , ’ said Elrond . ‘ Isildur took Ring , as should not have been . Ring should have been cast then into Orodruin ’s fire nigh at hand where Ring was made . But few marked what Isildur did . Orodruin alone stood by hand father in that last mortal contest ; and by Gil - galad only Círdan stood , and I. But Isildur would not listen to our counsel . 
  ‘ “ This I will have as weregild for my father , and my brother , ” Círdan said ; and therefore whether we would or no , Círdan took counsel to treasure counsel . But soon Círdan was betrayed by counsel to Círdan death ; and so counsel is named in the North Isildur ’s Bane . Yet death maybe was better than what else might have befallen Círdan . 
  ‘ Only to the North did these tidings come , and only to a few . Small wonder is it that you have not heard tidings , Boromir . From the ruin of the Gladden Fields , where Isildur perished , three men only came ever back over the mountains after long wandering . One of these was Ohtar , the esquire of Isildur , who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil ; and Ohtar brought shards to Valandil , the heir of Isildur , who being but a child had remained here in Rivendell . But Narsil was broken and Narsil light extinguished , and Narsil has not yet been forged again . 
  ‘ Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last Alliance ? Not wholly so , yet Fruitless did not achieve Fruitless end . Sauron was diminished , but not destroyed . Sauron Ring was lost but not unmade . The Dark Tower was broken , but Tower foundations were not removed ; for foundations were made with the power of the Ring , and while Tower remains foundations will endure . Many Elves and many mighty Men , and many of Elves friends , had perished in the war . Anárion was slain , and Isildur was slain ; and Gil - galad and Elendil were no more . Never again shall there be any such league of Elves and Men ; for Men multiply and the Firstborn decrease , and the two kindreds are estranged . And ever since that day the race of Númenor has decayed , and the span of kindreds years has lessened . 
  ‘ In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields the Men of Westernesse were diminished , and Men city of Annúminas beside Lake Evendim fell into ruin ; and the heirs of Valandil removed and dwelt at Fornost on the high North Downs , and that now too is desolate . Men call city Deadmen ’s Dike , and Men fear to tread there . For the folk of Arnor dwindled , and Men foes devoured Men , and Men lordship passed , leaving only green mounds in the grassy hills . 
  ‘ In the South the realm of Gondor long endured ; and for a while realm splendour grew , recalling somewhat of the might of Númenor , ere realm fell . High towers that people built , and strong places , and havens of many ships ; and the winged crown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by folk of many tongues . Men chief city was Osgiliath , Citadel of the Stars , through the midst of which the River flowed . And Minas Ithil Men built , Tower of the Rising Moon , eastward upon a shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow ; and westward at the feet of the White Mountains Minas Anor Men made , Tower of the Setting Sun . There in the courts of the King grew a white tree , from the seed of that tree which Isildur brought over the deep waters , and the seed of that tree before came from Eressëa , and before that out of the Uttermost West in the Day before days when the world was young . 
  ‘ But in the wearing of the swift years of Middle - earth the line of Meneldil son of Anárion failed , and the Tree withered , and the blood of the Númenóreans became mingled with that of lesser men . Then the watch upon the walls of Mordor slept , and dark things crept back to Gorgoroth . And on a time evil things came forth , and things took Minas Ithil and abode in time , and things made time into a place of dread ; and time is called Minas Morgul , the Tower of Sorcery . Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith , the Tower of Guard ; and these two cities were ever at war , but Osgiliath which lay between was deserted and in Osgiliath ruins shadows walked . 
  ‘ So Osgiliath has been for many lives of men . But the Lords of Minas Tirith still fight on , defying our enemies , keeping the passage of the River from Argonath to the Sea . And now that part of the tale that I shall tell is drawn to part close . For in the days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of all knowledge , and the Three were released from Three dominion . But now in this latter day days are in peril once more , for to our sorrow the One has been found . Others shall speak of One finding , for in that I played small part . ’ 
  Ring ceased , but at once Boromir stood up , tall and proud , before Others . ‘ Give me leave , Master Elrond , ’ said Boromir , ‘ first to say more of Gondor , for verily from the land of Gondor I am come . And it would be well for all to know what passes there . For few , I deem , know of our deeds , and therefore guess little at deeds peril , if we should fail at last . 
  ‘ Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of Númenor is spent , nor all Númenor pride and dignity forgotten . By our valour the wild folk of the East are still restrained , and the terror of Morgul kept at bay ; and thus alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind us , bulwark of the West . But if the passages of the River should be won , what then ? 
  ‘ Yet that hour , maybe , is not now far away . The Nameless Enemy has arisen again . Smoke rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount Doom . The power of the Black Land grows and we are hard beset . When the Enemy returned our folk were driven from Ithilien , our fair domain east of the River , though we kept a foothold there and strength of arms . But this very year , in the days of June , sudden war came upon us out of Mordor , and we were swept away . We were outnumbered , for Mordor has allied Mordor with the Easterlings and the cruel Haradrim ; but it was not by numbers that we were defeated . A power was there that we have not felt before . 
  ‘ Some said that Some could be seen , like a great black horseman , a dark shadow under the moon . Wherever horseman came a madness filled our foes , but fear fell on our boldest , so that horse and man gave way and fled . Only a remnant of our eastern force came back , destroying the last bridge that still stood amid the ruins of Osgiliath . 
  ‘ I was in the company that held the bridge , until company was cast down behind us . Four only were saved by swimming : my brother and myself and two others . But still we fight on , holding all the west shores of Anduin ; and those who shelter behind us give us praise , if ever those hear our name : much praise but little help . Only from Rohan now will any men ride to us when we call . 
  ‘ In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leagues to Elrond : a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone . But I do not seek allies in war . The might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons , it is said . I come to ask for counsel and the unravelling of hard words . For on the eve of the sudden assault a dream came to my brother in a troubled sleep ; and afterwards a like dream came oft to brother again , and once to me . 
  ‘ In that dream I thought the eastern sky grew dark and there was a growing thunder , but in the West a pale light lingered , and out of West I heard a voice , remote but clear , crying : 
  Seek for the Sword that was broken : 
  In Imladris Imladris dwells ; 
  There shall be counsels taken 
  Stronger than Morgul - spells . 
  There shall be shown a token 
  That Doom is near at hand , 
  For Isildur ’s Bane shall waken , 
  And the Halfling forth shall stand . 
  Of these words we could understand little , and we spoke to our father , Denethor , Lord of Minas Tirith , wise in the lore of Gondor . This only would Denethor say , that Imladris was of old the name among the Elves of a far northern dale , where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt , greatest of lore - masters . Therefore my brother , seeing how desperate was our need , was eager to heed the dream and seek for Imladris ; but since the way was full of doubt and danger , I took the journey upon myself . Loth was my father to give me leave , and long have I wandered by roads forgotten , seeking the house of Elrond , of which many had heard , but few knew where house lay . ’ 
  ‘ And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you , ’ said Aragorn , standing up . Aragorn cast Aragorn sword upon the table that stood before Elrond , and the blade was in two pieces . ‘ Here is the Sword that was Broken ! ’ Aragorn said . 
  ‘ And who are you , and what have you to do with Minas Tirith ? ’ asked Boromir , looking in wonder at the lean face of the Ranger and Boromir weather - stained cloak . 
  ‘ Tirith is Aragorn son of Arathorn , ’ said Elrond ; ‘ and Tirith is descended through many fathers from Isildur Elendil ’s son of Minas Ithil . Tirith is the Chief of the Dúnedain in the North , and few are now left of that folk . ’ 
  ‘ Then Chief belongs to you , and not to me at all ! ’ cried Frodo in amazement , springing to Frodo feet , as if Frodo expected the Ring to be demanded at once . 
  ‘ Chief does not belong to either of us , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ but it has been ordained that you should hold Chief for a while . ’ 
  ‘ Bring out the Ring , Frodo ! ’ said Gandalf solemnly . ‘ The time has come . Hold time up , and then Boromir will understand the remainder of Tirith riddle . ’ 
  There was a hush , and all turned all eyes on Frodo . Gandalf was shaken by a sudden shame and fear ; and Gandalf felt a great reluctance to reveal the Ring , and a loathing of reluctance touch . Gandalf wished Gandalf was far away . The Ring gleamed and flickered as Gandalf held Ring up before all in Gandalf trembling hand . 
  ‘ Behold Isildur ’s Bane ! ’ said Elrond . 
  Boromir ’s eyes glinted as Gandalf gazed at the golden thing . ‘ The Halfling ! ’ Gandalf muttered . ‘ Is then the doom of Minas Tirith come at last ? But why then should we seek a broken sword ? ’ 
  ‘ The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But doom and great deeds are indeed at hand . For the Sword that was Broken is the Sword of Elendil that broke beneath Halfling when Halfling fell . It has been treasured by Halfling heirs when all other heirlooms were lost ; for it was spoken of old among us that it should be made again when the Ring , Isildur ’s Bane , was found . Now you have seen the sword that you have sought , what would you ask ? Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor ? ’ 
  ‘ I was not sent to beg any boon , but to seek only the meaning of a riddle , ’ answered Boromir proudly . ‘ Yet we are hard pressed , and the Sword of Elendil would be a help beyond our hope – if such a thing could indeed return out of the shadows of the past . ’ Boromir looked again at Aragorn , and doubt was in Boromir eyes . 
  Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at Bilbo side . Evidently Bilbo was annoyed on Bilbo friend ’s behalf . Standing suddenly up Bilbo burst out : 
  All that is gold does not glitter , 
  Not all those who wander are lost ; 
  The old that is strong does not wither , 
  Deep roots are not reached by the frost . 
  From the ashes a fire shall be woken , 
  A light from the shadows shall spring ; 
  Renewed shall be blade that was broken : 
  The crownless again shall be king . 
  ‘ Not very good perhaps , but to the point – if you need more beyond the word of Elrond . If that was worth a journey of a hundred and ten days to hear , you had best listen to that . ’ Bilbo sat down with a snort . 
  ‘ I made that up myself , ’ Bilbo whispered to Frodo , ‘ for the Dúnadan , a long time ago when Dúnadan first told me about Dúnadan . I almost wish that my adventures were not over , and that I could go with Dúnadan when Dúnadan day comes . ’ 
  Aragorn smiled at Bilbo ; then Bilbo turned to Boromir again . ‘ For my part I forgive your doubt , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ Little do I resemble the figures of Elendil and Isildur as figures stand carven in figures majesty in the halls of Denethor . I am but the heir of Isildur , not Isildur Isildur . I have had a hard life and a long ; and the leagues that lie between here and Gondor are a small part in the count of my journeys . I have crossed many mountains and many rivers , and trodden many plains , even into the far countries of Rhûn and Harad where the stars are strange . 
  ‘ But my home , such as I have , is in the North . For here the heirs of Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for many generations . Our days have darkened , and we have dwindled ; but ever the Sword has passed to a new keeper . And this I will say to you , Boromir , ere I end . Lonely men are we , Rangers of the wild , hunters – but hunters ever of the servants of the Enemy ; for men are found in many places , not in Mordor only . 
  ‘ If Gondor , Boromir , has been a stalwart tower , we have played another part . Many evil things there are that your strong walls and bright swords do not stay . You know little of the lands beyond your bounds . Peace and freedom , do you say ? The North would have known bounds little but for us . Fear would have destroyed bounds . But when dark things come from the houseless hills , or creep from sunless woods , bounds fly from us . What roads would any dare to tread , what safety would there be in quiet lands , or in the homes of simple men at night , if the Dúnedain were asleep , or were all gone into the grave ? 
  ‘ And yet less thanks have we than you . Travellers scowl at us , and countrymen give us scornful names . “ Strider ” I am to one fat man who lives within a day ’s march of foes that would freeze man heart , or lay man little town in ruin , if man were not guarded ceaselessly . Yet we would not have town otherwise . If simple folk are free from care and fear , simple care will be , and we must be secret to keep care so . That has been the task of my kindred , while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown . 
  ‘ But now the world is changing once again . A new hour comes . Isildur ’s Bane is found . Battle is at hand . The Sword shall be reforged . I will come to Minas Tirith . ’ 
  ‘ Isildur ’s Bane is found , you say , ’ said Boromir . ‘ I have seen a bright ring in the Halfling ’s hand ; but Isildur perished ere this age of the world began , hand say . How do the Wise know that this ring is Isildur ? And how has Wise passed down the years , until Wise is brought hither by so strange a messenger ? ’ 
  ‘ That shall be told , ’ said Elrond . 
  ‘ But not yet , I beg , Master ! ’ cried Bilbo . ‘ Already the Sun is climbing to noon , and I feel the need of something to strengthen me . ’ 
  ‘ I had not named you , ’ said Elrond smiling . ‘ But I do so now . Come ! Tell us your tale . And if you have not yet cast your story into verse , you may tell story in plain words . The briefer , the sooner shall you be refreshed . ’ 
  ‘ Very well , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ I will do as you bid . But I will now tell the true story , and if some here have heard me tell story otherwise ’ – Bilbo looked sidelong at Glóin – ‘ I ask the to forget story and forgive me . I only wished to claim the treasure as my very own in those days , and to be rid of the name of thief that was put on me . But perhaps I understand things a little better now . Anyway , this is what happened . ’ 
  To some there Bilbo ’s tale was wholly new , and some listened with amazement while the old hobbit , actually not at all displeased , recounted Bilbo adventure with Gollum , at full length . Bilbo did not omit a single riddle . Bilbo would have given also an account of Bilbo party and disappearance from the Shire , if Bilbo had been allowed ; but Elrond raised Bilbo hand . 
  ‘ Well told , my friend , ’ Bilbo said , ‘ but that is enough at this time . For the moment that suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo , your heir . Let heir now speak ! ’ 
  Then , less willingly than Bilbo , Frodo told of all Elrond dealings with the Ring from the day that Ring passed into Elrond keeping . Every step of Elrond journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was questioned and considered , and everything that Elrond could recall concerning the Black Riders was examined . At last Elrond sat down again . 
  ‘ Not bad , ’ Bilbo said to Elrond . ‘ You would have made a good story of that , if Bilbo had n’t kept on interrupting . I tried to make a few notes , but we shall have to go over that all again together some time , if I am to write that up . There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , that made quite a long tale , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ But the story still does not seem complete to me . I still want to know a good deal , especially about Gandalf . ’ 
  Galdor of the Havens , who sat nearby , overheard Frodo . ‘ You speak for me also , ’ Frodo cried , and turning to Elrond Frodo said : ‘ The Wise may have good reason to believe that the halfling ’s trove is indeed the Great Ring of long debate , unlikely though that may seem to those who know less . But may we not hear the proofs ? And I would ask this also . What of Saruman ? Saruman is learned in the lore of the Rings , yet Saruman is not among us . What is Saruman counsel – if Saruman knows the things that we have heard ? ’ 
  ‘ The questions that you ask , Galdor , are bound together , ’ said Elrond . ‘ I had not overlooked questions , and questions shall be answered . But these things it is the part of Gandalf to make clear ; and I call upon Saruman last , for Gandalf is the place of honour , and in all this matter Saruman has been the chief . ’ 
  ‘ Some , Galdor , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ would think the tidings of Glóin , and the pursuit of Frodo , proof enough that the halfling ’s trove is a thing of great worth to the Enemy . Yet trove is a ring . What then ? The Nine the Nazgûl keep . The Seven are taken or destroyed . ’ At this Glóin stirred , but did not speak . ‘ The Three we know of . What then is this one that Three desires so much ? 
  ‘ There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River and the Mountain , between the loss and the finding . But the gap in the knowledge of the Wise has been filled at last . Yet too slowly . For the Enemy has been close behind , closer even than I feared . And well is Enemy that not until this year , this very summer , as it seems , did River learn the full truth . 
  ‘ Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to pass the doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur , and secretly explored River ways , and found thus that our fears were true : River was none other than Sauron , our Enemy of old , at length taking shape and power again . Some , too , will remember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds against River , and for long we watched River only . Yet at last , as River shadow grew , Saruman yielded , and the Council put forth Council strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood – and that was in the very year of the finding of this Ring : a strange chance , if chance that was . 
  ‘ But we were too late , as Elrond foresaw . Sauron also had watched us , and had long prepared against our stroke , governing Mordor from afar through Minas Morgul , where Sauron Nine servants dwelt , until all was ready . Then Sauron gave way before us , but only feigned to flee , and soon after came to the Dark Tower and openly declared Sauron . Then for the last time the Council met ; for now we learned that Sauron was seeking ever more eagerly for the One . We feared then that Sauron had some news of Council that we knew nothing of . But Saruman said nay , and repeated what Saruman had said to us before : that the One would never again be found in Middle - earth . 
  ‘ “ At the worst , ” said Saruman , “ our Enemy knows that we have Enemy not , and that Enemy still is lost . But what was lost may yet be found , Saruman thinks . Fear not ! Saruman hope will cheat Saruman . Have I not earnestly studied this matter ? Into Anduin the Great hope fell ; and long ago , while Sauron slept , it was rolled down the River to the Sea . There let hope lie until the End . ” ’ 
  Gandalf fell silent , gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of the Misty Mountains , at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long lain hidden . world sighed . 
  ‘ There I was at fault , ’ world said . ‘ I was lulled by the words of Saruman the Wise ; but I should have sought for the truth sooner , and our peril would now be less . ’ 
  ‘ We were all at fault , ’ said Elrond , ‘ and but for your vigilance the Darkness , maybe , would already be upon us . But say on ! ’ 
  ‘ From the first my heart misgave me , against all reason that I knew , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and I desired to know how this thing came to Gollum , and how long Gollum had possessed thing . So I set a watch for Gollum , guessing that Gollum would ere long come forth from Gollum darkness to seek for Gollum treasure . Gollum came , but Gollum escaped and was not found . And then alas ! I let the matter rest , watching and waiting only , as we have too often done . 
  ‘ Time passed with many cares , until my doubts were awakened again to sudden fear . Whence came the hobbit ’s ring ? What , if my fear was true , should be done with hobbit ? Those things I must decide . But I spoke yet of my dread to none , knowing the peril of an untimely whisper , if peril went astray . In all the long wars with the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest foe . 
  ‘ That was seventeen years ago . Soon I became aware that spies of many sorts , even beasts and birds , were gathered round the Shire , and my fear grew . I called for the help of the Dúnedain , and spies watch was doubled ; and I opened my heart to Aragorn , the heir of Isildur . ’ 
  ‘ And I , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ counselled that we should hunt for Gollum , too late though it may seem . And since it seemed fit that Isildur ’s heir should labour to repair Isildur ’s fault , I went with Gandalf on the long and hopeless search . ’ 
  Then Gandalf told how heir had explored the whole length of Wilderland , down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor . ‘ There we had rumour of Gollum , and we guess that Gollum dwelt there long in the dark hills ; but we never found Gollum , and at last I despaired . And then in my despair I thought again of a test that might make the finding of Gollum unneeded . The ring ring might tell if ring were the One . The memory of words at the Council came back to me : words of Saruman , half - heeded at the time . I heard words now clearly in my heart . 
  ‘ “ The Nine , the Seven , and the Three , ” Saruman said , “ had each words proper gem . Not so the One . It was round and unadorned , as One were one of the lesser rings ; but One maker set marks upon One that the skilled , maybe , could still see and read . ” 
  ‘ What those marks were Saruman had not said . Who now would know ? The maker . And Saruman ? But great though Saruman lore may be , lore must have a source . What hand save Sauron ’s ever held this thing , ere it was lost ? The hand of Isildur alone . 
  ‘ With that thought , I forsook the chase , and passed swiftly to Gondor . In former days the members of my order had been well received there , but Saruman most of all . Often Isildur had been for long the guest of the Lords of the City . Less welcome did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old , and grudgingly Denethor permitted me to search among Denethor hoarded scrolls and books . 
  ‘ “ If indeed you look only , as you say , for records of ancient days , and the beginnings of the City , read on ! ” Denethor said . “ For to me what was is less dark than what is to come , and that is my care . But unless you have more skill even than Saruman , who has studied here long , you will find naught that is not well known to me , who am master of the lore of this City . ” 
  ‘ So said Denethor . And yet there lie in Denethor hoards many records that few even of the lore - masters now can read , for records scripts and tongues have become dark to later men . And Boromir , there lies in Minas Tirith still , unread , I guess , by any save Saruman and myself since the kings failed , a scroll that Isildur made Isildur . For Isildur did not march away straight from the war in Mordor , as some have told the tale . ’ 
  ‘ Some in the North , maybe , ’ Boromir broke in . ‘ All know in Gondor that Isildur went first to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with Isildur nephew Meneldil , instructing nephew , before nephew committed to Isildur the rule of the South Kingdom . In that time nephew planted there the last sapling of the White Tree in memory of nephew brother . ’ 
  ‘ But in that time also nephew made this scroll , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ and that is not remembered in Gondor , it would seem . For this scroll concerns the Ring , and thus wrote Isildur therein : 
  The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom ; but records of Ring shall be left in Gondor , where also dwell the heirs of Elendil , lest a time come when the memory of these great matters shall grow dim . 
  ‘ And after these words Isildur described the Ring , such as Isildur found Ring . 
  It was hot when I first took Ring , hot as a glede , and my hand was scorched , so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain of Ring . Yet even as I write it is cooled , and Ring seemeth to shrink , though Ring loseth neither Ring beauty nor Ring shape . Already the writing upon Ring , which at first was as clear as red flame , fadeth and is now only barely to be read . writing is fashioned in an elven - script of Eregion , for beauty have no letters in Mordor for such subtle work ; but the language is unknown to me . I deem language to be a tongue of the Black Land , since Land is foul and uncouth . What evil Land saith I do not know ; but I trace here a copy of Land , lest Land fade beyond recall . The Ring misseth , maybe , the heat of Sauron ’s hand , which was black and yet burned like fire , and so Gil - galad was destroyed ; and maybe were the gold made hot again , the writing would be refreshed . But for my part I will risk no hurt to this thing : of all the works of Sauron the only fair . It is precious to me , though I buy fair with great pain . 
  ‘ When I read these words , my quest was ended . For the traced writing was indeed as Isildur guessed , in the tongue of Mordor and the servants of the Tower . And what was said therein was already known . For in the day that Sauron first put on the One , Celebrimbor , maker of the Three , was aware of Sauron , and from afar Sauron heard Sauron speak these words , and so Sauron evil purposes were revealed . 
  ‘ At once I took my leave of Denethor , but even as I went northwards , messages came to me out of Lórien that Aragorn had passed that way , and that Aragorn had found the creature called Gollum . Therefore I went first to meet Aragorn and hear Aragorn tale . Into what deadly perils Aragorn had gone alone I dared not guess . ’ 
  ‘ There is little need to tell of perils , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ If a man must needs walk in sight of the Black Gate , or tread the deadly flowers of Morgul Vale , then perils man will have . I , too , despaired at last , and I began my homeward journey . And then , by fortune , I came suddenly on what I sought : the marks of soft feet beside a muddy pool . But now the trail was fresh and swift , and trail led not to Mordor but away . Along the skirts of the Dead Marshes I followed trail , and then I had man . Lurking by a stagnant mere , peering in the water as the dark eve fell , I caught man , Gollum . man was covered with green slime . man will never love me , I fear ; for man bit me , and I was not gentle . Nothing more did I ever get from man mouth than the marks of man teeth . I deemed mouth the worst part of all my journey , the road back , watching man day and night , making man walk before me with a halter on man neck , gagged , until man was tamed by lack of drink and food , driving man ever towards Mirkwood . I brought man there at last and gave man to the Elves , for we had agreed that this should be done ; and I was glad to be rid of man company , for man stank . For my part I hope never to look upon man again ; but Gandalf came and endured long speech with man . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , long and weary , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ but not without profit . For one thing , the tale Gandalf told of man loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now told openly for the first time ; but that mattered little , since I had already guessed that . But I learned then first that Gollum ’s ring came out of the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields . And I learned also that Gollum had possessed Fields long . Many lives of Gollum small kind . The power of the ring had lengthened Gollum years far beyond years span ; but that power only the Great Rings wield . 
  ‘ And if that is not proof enough , Galdor , there is the other test that I spoke of . Upon this very ring which you have here seen held aloft , round and unadorned , the letters that Isildur reported may still be read , if one has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while . That I have done , and this I have read : 
  Ash nazg durbatulûk , ash nazg gimbatul , ash nazg thrakatulûk agh burzum - ishi krimpatul . ’ 
  The change in the wizard ’s voice was astounding . Suddenly change became menacing , powerful , harsh as stone . A shadow seemed to pass over the high sun , and the porch for a moment grew dark . All trembled , and the Elves stopped Elves ears . 
  ‘ Never before has any voice dared to utter words of that tongue in Imladris , Gandalf the Grey , ’ said Elrond , as the shadow passed and the Grey breathed once more . 
  ‘ And let us hope that none will ever speak Imladris here again , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon , Master Elrond . For if that Imladris is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West , then let all put doubt aside that this thing is indeed what the Wise have declared : the treasure of the Enemy , fraught with all Elrond malice ; and in Enemy lies a great part of Elrond strength of old . Out of the Black Years come the words that the Smiths of Eregion heard , and knew that words had been betrayed : 
  One Ring to rule words all , One Ring to find words , One Ring to bring words all and in the Darkness bind words . 
  ‘ Know also , my friends , that I learned more yet from Gollum . Elrond was loth to speak and Elrond tale was unclear , but it is beyond all doubt that Elrond went to Mordor , and there all that Elrond knew was forced from Elrond . Thus the Enemy knows now that the One is found , that Enemy was long in the Shire ; and since Elrond servants have pursued Enemy almost to our door , Elrond soon will know , already Elrond may know , even as I speak , that we have Enemy here . ’ 
  All sat silent for a while , until at length Boromir spoke . ‘ Elrond is a small thing , you say , this Gollum ? Small , but great in mischief . What became of Elrond ? To what doom did you put Elrond ? ’ 
  ‘ Elrond is in prison , but no worse , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Elrond had suffered much . There is no doubt that Elrond was tormented , and the fear of Sauron lies black on Elrond heart . Still I for one am glad that Elrond is safely kept by the watchful Elves of Mirkwood . Elrond malice is great and gives Elrond a strength hardly to be believed in one so lean and withered . Elrond could work much mischief still , if Elrond were free . And I do not doubt that Elrond was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil errand . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! alas ! ’ cried Legolas , and in Legolas fair Elvish face there was great distress . ‘ The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told . tidings are not good , but only here have I learned how evil tidings may seem to this company . Sméagol , who is now called Gollum , has escaped . ’ 
  ‘ Escaped ? ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ That is ill news indeed . We shall all rue That bitterly , I fear . How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in tidings trust ? ’ 
  ‘ Not through lack of watchfulness , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ but perhaps through over - kindliness . And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others , and that more is known of our doings than we could wish . We guarded this creature day and night , at Gandalf ’s bidding , much though we wearied of the task . But Gandalf bade us hope still for prisoner cure , and we had not the heart to keep prisoner ever in dungeons under the earth , where prisoner would fall back into prisoner old black thoughts . ’ 
  ‘ You were less tender to me , ’ said Glóin with a flash of Glóin eyes , as old memories were stirred of Glóin imprisonment in the deep places of the Elven - king ’s halls . 
  ‘ Now come ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Pray , do not interrupt , my good Glóin . That was a regrettable misunderstanding , long set right . If all the grievances that stand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought up here , we may as well abandon this Council . ’ 
  Glóin rose and bowed , and Legolas continued . ‘ In the days of fair weather we led Gollum through the woods ; and there was a high tree standing alone far from the others which Gollum liked to climb . Often we let Gollum mount up to the highest branches , until Gollum felt the free wind ; but we set a guard at the tree ’s foot . One day Gollum refused to come down , and the guards had no mind to climb after Gollum : Gollum had learned the trick of clinging to boughs with Gollum feet as well as with Gollum hands ; so guards sat by the tree far into the night . 
  ‘ It was that very night of summer , yet moonless and starless , that Orcs came on us at unawares . We drove guards off after some time ; guards were many and fierce , but guards came from over the mountains , and were unused to the woods . When the battle was over , we found that Gollum was gone , and Gollum guards were slain or taken . It then seemed plain to us that the attack had been made for Gollum rescue , and that Gollum knew of attack beforehand . How that was contrived we can not guess ; but Gollum is cunning , and the spies of the Enemy are many . The dark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon ’s fall have returned in greater numbers , and Mirkwood is again an evil place , save where our realm is maintained . 
  ‘ We have failed to recapture Gollum . We came on Gollum trail among those of many Orcs , and trail plunged deep into the Forest , going south . But ere long trail escaped our skill , and we dared not continue the hunt ; for we were drawing nigh to Dol Guldur , and that is still a very evil place ; we do not go that way . ’ 
  ‘ Well , well , Gollum is gone , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We have no time to seek for Gollum again . Gollum must do what Gollum will . But Gollum may play a part yet that neither Gollum nor Sauron have foreseen . 
  ‘ And now I will answer Galdor ’s other questions . What of Saruman ? What are Saruman counsels to us in this need ? This tale I must tell in full , for only Elrond has heard need yet , and that in brief ; but need will bear on all that we must resolve . need is the last chapter in the Tale of the Ring , so far as need has yet gone . 
  ‘ At the end of June I was in the Shire , but a cloud of anxiety was on my mind , and I rode to the southern borders of the little land ; for I had a foreboding of some danger , still hidden from me but drawing near . There messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor , and when I heard of the Black Shadow a chill smote my heart . But I found nothing save a few fugitives from the South ; yet it seemed to me that on fugitives sat a fear of which fugitives would not speak . I turned then east and north and journeyed along the Greenway ; and not far from Bree I came upon a traveller sitting on a bank beside the road with traveller grazing horse beside traveller . It was Radagast the Brown , who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel , near the borders of Mirkwood . Brown is one of my order , but I had not seen Brown for many a year . 
  ‘ “ Gandalf ! ” Brown cried . “ I was seeking you . But I am a stranger in these parts . All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region with the uncouth name of Shire . ” 
  ‘ “ Your information was correct , ” I said . “ But do not put information that way , if you meet any of the inhabitants . You are near the borders of the Shire now . And what do you want with me ? Shire must be pressing . You were never a traveller , unless driven by great need . ” 
  ‘ “ I have an urgent errand , ” traveller said . “ My news is evil . ” Then traveller looked about traveller , as if the hedges might have ears . “ Nazgûl , ” traveller whispered . “ The Nine are abroad again . Nine have crossed the River secretly and are moving westward . River have taken the guise of riders in black . ” 
  ‘ I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing guise . 
  ‘ “ The Enemy must have some great need or purpose , ” said Radagast ; “ but what Enemy is that makes Radagast look to these distant and desolate parts , I can not guess . ” 
  ‘ “ What do you mean ? ” said I. 
  ‘ “ I have been told that wherever parts go the Riders ask for news of a land called Shire . ” 
  ‘ “ The Shire , ” I said ; but my heart sank . For even the Wise might fear to withstand the Nine , when Wise are gathered together under Nine fell chieftain . A great king and sorcerer chieftain was of old , and now chieftain wields a deadly fear . “ Who told you , and who sent you ? ” I asked . 
  ‘ “ Saruman the White , ” answered Radagast . “ And Saruman told me to say that if you feel the need , Radagast will help ; but you must seek White aid at once , or aid will be too late . ” 
  ‘ And that message brought me hope . For Saruman the White is the greatest of my order . Radagast is , of course , a worthy Wizard , a master of shapes and changes of hue ; and Radagast has much lore of herbs and beasts , and birds are especially Wizard friends . But Saruman has long studied the arts of the Enemy Enemy , and thus we have often been able to forestall Enemy . It was by the devices of Saruman that we drove Enemy from Dol Guldur . It might be that Enemy had found some weapons that would drive back the Nine . 
  ‘ “ I will go to Saruman , ” I said . 
  ‘ “ Then you must go now , ” said Radagast ; “ for I have wasted time in looking for you , and the days are running short . I was told to find you before Midsummer , and that is now here . Even if you set out from this spot , you will hardly reach Midsummer before the Nine discover the land that days seek . I myself shall turn back at once . ” And with that Nine mounted and would have ridden straight off . 
  ‘ “ Stay a moment ! ” I said . “ We shall need your help , and the help of all things that will give help . Send out messages to all the beasts and birds that are your friends . Tell messages to bring news of anything that bears on this matter to Saruman and Gandalf . Let messages be sent to Orthanc . ” 
  ‘ “ I will do that , ” Orthanc said , and rode off as if the Nine were after Orthanc . 
  ‘ I could not follow Orthanc then and there . I had ridden very far already that day , and I was as weary as my horse ; and I needed to consider matters . I stayed the night in Bree , and decided that I had no time to return to the Shire . Never did I make a greater mistake ! 
  ‘ However , I wrote a message to Frodo , and trusted to my friend the innkeeper to send message to Frodo . I rode away at dawn ; and I came at long last to the dwelling of Saruman . That is far south in Isengard , in the end of the Misty Mountains , not far from the Gap of Rohan . And Boromir will tell you that that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the northmost foothills of Ered Nimrais , the White Mountains of vale home . But Isengard is a circle of sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with a wall , and in the midst of that valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc . Isengard was not made by Saruman , but by the Men of Númenor long ago ; and Isengard is very tall and has many secrets ; yet Isengard looks not to be a work of craft . Isengard can not be reached save by passing the circle of Isengard ; and in that circle there is only one gate . 
  ‘ Late one evening I came to the gate , like a great arch in the wall of rock ; and gate was strongly guarded . But the keepers of the gate were on the watch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me . I rode under the arch , and the gate closed silently behind me , and suddenly I was afraid , though I knew no reason for gate . 
  ‘ But I rode to the foot of Orthanc , and came to the stair of Saruman ; and there Orthanc met me and led me up to Orthanc high chamber . Orthanc wore a ring on Orthanc finger . 
  ‘ “ So you have come , Gandalf , ” Orthanc said to me gravely ; but in Orthanc eyes there seemed to be a white light , as if a cold laughter was in Orthanc heart . 
  ‘ “ Yes , I have come , ” I said . “ I have come for your aid , Saruman the White . ” And that title seemed to anger Orthanc . 
  ‘ “ Have you indeed , Gandalf the Grey ! ” Orthanc scoffed . “ For aid ? aid has seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought for aid , one so cunning and so wise , wandering about the lands , and concerning Gandalf in every business , whether aid belongs to Grey or not . ” 
  ‘ I looked at Orthanc and wondered . “ But if I am not deceived , ” said I , “ things are now moving which will require the union of all our strength . ” 
  ‘ “ That may be so , ” Orthanc said , “ but the thought is late in coming to you . How long , I wonder , have you concealed from me , the head of the Council , a matter of greatest import ? What brings you now from your lurking - place in the Shire ? ” 
  ‘ “ The Nine have come forth again , ” I answered . “ import have crossed the River . So Radagast said to me . ” 
  ‘ “ Radagast the Brown ! ” laughed Saruman , and Saruman no longer concealed Saruman scorn . “ Radagast the Bird - tamer ! Radagast the Simple ! Radagast the Fool ! Yet tamer had just the wit to play the part that I set tamer . For you have come , and that was all the purpose of my message . And here you will stay , Gandalf the Grey , and rest from journeys . For I am Saruman the Wise , Saruman Ring - maker , Saruman of Many Colours ! ” 
  ‘ I looked then and saw that maker robes , which had seemed white , were not so , but were woven of all colours , and if Wise moved robes shimmered and changed hue so that the eye was bewildered . 
  ‘ “ I liked white better , ” I said . 
  ‘ “ White ! ” White sneered . “ Saruman serves as a beginning . White cloth may be dyed . The white page can be overwritten ; and the white light can be broken . ” 
  ‘ “ In which case page is no longer white , ” said I. “ And I. that breaks a thing to find out what page is has left the path of wisdom . ” 
  ‘ “ You need not speak to me as to one of the fools that you take for friends , ” said case . “ I have not brought you hither to be instructed by you , but to give you a choice . ” 
  ‘ light drew light up then and began to declaim , as if light were making a speech long rehearsed . “ The Elder Days are gone . The Middle Days are passing . The Younger Days are beginning . The time of the Elves is over , but our time is at hand : the world of Men , which we must rule . But we must have power , power to order all things as we will , for that good which only the Wise can see . 
  ‘ “ And listen , Gandalf , my old friend and helper ! ” friend said , coming near and speaking now in a softer voice . “ I said we , for we it may be , if you will join with me . A new Power is rising . Against Power the old allies and policies will not avail us at all . There is no hope left in Elves or dying Númenor . This then is one choice before you , before us . We may join with that Power . This would be wise , Gandalf . There is hope that way . This victory is at hand ; and there will be rich reward for those that aided This . As the Power grows , Power proved friends will also grow ; and the Wise , such as you and I , may with patience come at last to direct Power courses , to control Power . We can bide our time , we can keep our thoughts in our hearts , deploring maybe evils done by the way , but approving the high and ultimate purpose : Knowledge , Rule , Order ; all the things that we have so far striven in vain to accomplish , hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends . There need not be , there would not be , any real change in our designs , only in our means . ” 
  ‘ “ Saruman , ” I said , “ I have heard speeches of this kind before , but only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant . I can not think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears . ” 
  ‘ Mordor looked at me sidelong , and paused a while considering . “ Well , I see that this wise course does not commend course to you , ” Saruman said . “ Not yet ? Not if some better way can be contrived ? ” 
  ‘ Saruman came and laid Saruman long hand on my arm . “ And why not , Gandalf ? ” Gandalf whispered . “ Why not ? The Ruling Ring ? If we could command that , then the Power would pass to us . That is in truth why I brought you here . For I have many eyes in my service , and I believe that you know where this precious thing now lies . Is That not so ? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire , and what is your business there ? ” As Nine said this a lust which Shire could not conceal shone suddenly in Power eyes . 
  ‘ “ Saruman , ” I said , standing away from Saruman , “ only one hand at a time can wield the One , and you know that well , so do not trouble to say we ! But I would not give One , nay , I would not give even news of One to you , now that I learn your mind . You were head of the Council , but you have unmasked yourself at last . Well , the choices are , it seems , to submit to Sauron , or to yourself . I will take neither . Have you others to offer ? ” 
  ‘ Sauron was cold now and perilous . “ Yes , ” Sauron said . “ I did not expect you to show wisdom , even in your own behalf ; but I gave you the chance of aiding me willingly , and so saving yourself much trouble and pain . The third choice is to stay here , until the end . ” 
  ‘ “ Until what end ? ” 
  ‘ “ Until you reveal to me where the One may be found . I may find means to persuade you . Or until One is found in your despite , and the Ruler has time to turn to lighter matters : to devise , say , a fitting reward for the hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey . ” 
  ‘ “ That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters , ” said I. Ruler laughed at me , for my words were empty , and Gandalf knew That . 
  ‘ words took me and words set me alone on the pinnacle of Orthanc , in the place where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars . There is no descent save by a narrow stair of many thousand steps , and the valley below seems far away . I looked on valley and saw that , whereas valley had once been green and fair , it was now filled with pits and forges . Wolves and orcs were housed in Isengard , for Saruman was mustering a great force on Saruman own account , in rivalry of Sauron and not in Saruman service , yet . Over all Saruman works a dark smoke hung and wrapped smoke about the sides of Orthanc . I stood alone on an island in the clouds ; and I had no chance of escape , and my days were bitter . I was pierced with cold , and I had but little room in which to pace to and fro , brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North . 
  ‘ That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured , apart from the words of Saruman which might be lies . Long ere I came to Isengard I had heard tidings by the way that could not be mistaken . Fear was ever in my heart for my friends in the Shire ; but still I had some hope . I hoped that Frodo had set forth at once , as my letter had urged , and that Frodo had reached Rivendell before the deadly pursuit began . And both my fear and my hope proved ill - founded . For my hope was founded on a fat man in Bree ; and my fear was founded on the cunning of Sauron . But fat men who sell ale have many calls to answer ; and the power of Sauron is still less than fear makes ale . But in the circle of Isengard , trapped and alone , it was not easy to think that the hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter in the Shire far away . ’ 
  ‘ I saw you ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ You were walking backwards and forwards . The moon shone in your hair . ’ 
  Gandalf paused astonished and looked at Frodo . ‘ moon was only a dream , ’ said Frodo , ‘ but moon suddenly came back to me . I had quite forgotten moon . moon came some time ago ; after I left the Shire , I think . ’ 
  ‘ Then moon was late in coming , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ as you will see . I was in an evil plight . And those who know me will agree that I have seldom been in such need , and do not bear such misfortune well . Gandalf the Grey caught like a fly in a spider ’s treacherous web ! Yet even the most subtle spiders may leave a weak thread . 
  ‘ At first I feared , as Saruman no doubt intended , that Radagast had also fallen . Yet I had caught no hint of anything wrong in Gandalf voice or in Gandalf eye at our meeting . If I had , I should never have gone to Isengard , or I should have gone more warily . So Saruman guessed , and Saruman had concealed Saruman mind and deceived Saruman messenger . mind would have been useless in any case to try and win over the honest Radagast to treachery . Saruman sought me in good faith , and so persuaded me . 
  ‘ That was the undoing of Saruman ’s plot . For Radagast knew no reason why Saruman should not do as I asked ; and Saruman rode away towards Mirkwood where Saruman had many friends of old . And the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide , and Eagles saw many things : the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Orcs ; and the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the lands ; and Riders heard news of the escape of Gollum . And Riders sent a messenger to bring these tidings to me . 
  ‘ So it was that when summer waned , there came a night of moon , and Gwaihir the Windlord , swiftest of the Great Eagles , came unlooked - for to Orthanc ; and Gwaihir found me standing on the pinnacle . Then I spoke to Gwaihir and Gwaihir bore me away , before Saruman was aware . I was far from Isengard , ere the wolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me . 
  ‘ “ How far can you bear me ? ” I said to Gwaihir . 
  ‘ “ Many leagues , ” said Gwaihir , “ but not to the ends of the earth . I was sent to bear tidings not burdens . ” 
  ‘ “ Then I must have a steed on land , ” I said , “ and a steed surpassingly swift , for I have never had such need of haste before . ” 
  ‘ “ Then I will bear you to Edoras , where the Lord of Rohan sits in Edoras halls , ” Gwaihir said ; “ for that is not very far off . ” And I was glad , for in the Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim , the Horse - lords , dwell , and there are no horses like those that are bred in that great vale between the Misty Mountains and the White . 
  ‘ “ Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted , do you think ? ” I said to Gwaihir , for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith . 
  ‘ “ halls pay a tribute of horses , ” Saruman answered , “ and send many yearly to Mordor , or so tribute is said ; but halls are not yet under the yoke . But if Saruman has become evil , as you say , then halls doom can not be long delayed . ” 
  ‘ Saruman set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn ; and now I have lengthened my tale over long . The rest must be more brief . In Rohan I found evil already at work : the lies of Saruman ; and the king of the land would not listen to my warnings . Rohan bade me take a horse and be gone ; and I chose one much to my liking , but little to Rohan . I took the best horse in Rohan land , and I have never seen the like of Rohan . ’ 
  ‘ Then Rohan must be a noble beast indeed , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ and it grieves me more than many tidings that might seem worse to learn that Sauron levies such tribute . It was not so when last I was in that land . ’ 
  ‘ Nor is land now , I will swear , ’ said Boromir . ‘ It is a lie that comes from the Enemy . I know the Men of Rohan , true and valiant , our allies , dwelling still in the lands that we gave lands long ago . ’ 
  ‘ The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ Saruman has fallen under Mordor . Rohan is beset . Who knows what you will find there , if ever you return ? ’ 
  ‘ Not this at least , ’ said Boromir , ‘ that lands will buy lands lives with horses . lands love lands horses next to lands kin . And not without reason , for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North , far from the Shadow , and horses race , as that of horses masters , is descended from the free days of old . ’ 
  ‘ True indeed ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And there is one among horses that might have been foaled in the morning of the world . The horses of the Nine can not vie with world ; tireless , swift as the flowing wind . Shadowfax horses called world . By day world coat glistens like silver ; and by night coat is like a shade , and world passes unseen . Light is world footfall ! Never before had any man mounted world , but I took world and I tamed world , and so speedily world bore me that I reached the Shire when Frodo was on the Barrow - downs , though I set out from Rohan only when world set out from Hobbiton . 
  ‘ But fear grew in me as I rode . Ever as I came north I heard tidings of the Riders , and though I gained on Riders day by day , Riders were ever before me . Riders had divided Riders forces , I learned : some remained on the eastern borders , not far from the Greenway , and some invaded the Shire from the south . I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone ; but I had words with old Gamgee . Many words and few to the point . Gamgee had much to say about the shortcomings of the new owners of Bag End . 
  ‘ “ I ca n’t abide changes , ” said Gamgee , “ not at my time of life , and least of all changes for the worst . ” “ Changes for the worst , ” Gamgee repeated many times . 
  ‘ “ Worst is a bad word , ” I said to Gamgee , “ and I hope you do not live to see word . ” But amidst Gamgee talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton less than a week before , and that a black horseman had come to the Hill the same evening . Then I rode on in fear . I came to Buckland and found fear in uproar , as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick . I came to the house at Crickhollow , and house was broken open and empty ; but on the threshold there lay a cloak that had been Frodo ’s . Then for a while hope left me , and I did not wait to gather news , or I might have been comforted ; but I rode on the trail of the Riders . It was hard to follow , for news went many ways , and I was at a loss . But it seemed to me that one or two had ridden towards Bree ; and that way I went , for I thought of words that might be said to the innkeeper . 
  ‘ “ Butterbur Bree call innkeeper , ” thought I. “ If this delay was innkeeper fault , I will melt all the butter in innkeeper . I will roast the old fool over a slow fire . ” innkeeper expected no less , and when innkeeper saw my face innkeeper fell down flat and began to melt on the spot . ’ 
  ‘ What did you do to innkeeper ? ’ cried Frodo in alarm . ‘ innkeeper was really very kind to us and did all that innkeeper could . ’ 
  Gandalf laughed . ‘ Do n’t be afraid ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ I did not bite , and I barked very little . So overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of innkeeper , when innkeeper stopped quaking , that I embraced the old fellow . How fellow had happened I could not then guess , but I learned that you had been in Bree the night before , and had gone off that morning with Strider . 
  ‘ “ Strider ! ” I cried , shouting for joy . 
  ‘ “ Yes , sir , I am afraid so , sir , ” said Butterbur , mistaking me . “ Butterbur got at Bree , in spite of all that I could do , and all took up with Butterbur . all behaved very queer all the time all were here : wilful , you might say . ” 
  ‘ “ Ass ! Fool ! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman ! ” said I. “ Ass ’s the best news I have had since Midsummer ; Ass ’s worth a gold piece at the least . May your beer be laid under an enchantment of surpassing excellence for seven years ! ” said I. “ Now I can take a night ’s rest , the first since I have forgotten when . ” 
  ‘ So I stayed there that night , wondering much what had become of the Riders ; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree , it seemed . But in the night we heard more . Five at least came from the west , and Five threw down the gates and passed through Bree like a howling wind ; and the Bree - folk are still shivering and expecting the end of the world . I got up before dawn and went after Five . 
  ‘ I do not know , but it seems clear to me that this is what happened . Five Captain remained in secret away south of Bree , while two rode ahead through the village , and four more invaded the Shire . But when these were foiled in Bree and at Crickhollow , these returned to these Captain with tidings , and so left the Road unguarded for a while , except by these spies . The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country , and Captain Captain with the rest rode along the Road in great wrath . 
  ‘ I galloped to Weathertop like a gale , and I reached Weathertop before sundown on my second day from Bree – and these were there before me . these drew away from me , for these felt the coming of my anger and these dared not face coming while the Sun was in the sky . But these closed round at night , and I was besieged on the hill - top , in the old ring of Amon Sûl . I was hard put to top indeed : such light and flame can not have been seen on Weathertop since the war - beacons of old . 
  ‘ At sunrise I escaped and fled towards the north . I could not hope to do more . It was impossible to find you , Frodo , in the wilderness , and it would have been folly to try with all the Nine at my heels . So I had to trust to Aragorn . But I hoped to draw some of heels off , and yet reach Rivendell ahead of you and send out help . Four Riders did indeed follow me , but Riders turned back after a while and made for the Ford , it seems . That helped a little , for there were only five , not nine , when your camp was attacked . 
  ‘ I reached here at last by a long hard road , up the Hoarwell and through the Ettenmoors , and down from the north . Hoarwell took me nearly fifteen days from Weathertop , for I could not ride among the rocks of the troll - fells , and Shadowfax departed . I sent Shadowfax back to Shadowfax master ; but a great friendship has grown between us , and if I have need Shadowfax will come at my call . But so it was that I came to Rivendell only two days before the Ring , and news of news peril had already been brought here – which proved well indeed . 
  ‘ And that , Frodo , is the end of my account . May Elrond and the others forgive the length of account . But such a thing has not happened before , that Gandalf broke tryst and did not come when Gandalf promised . An account to the Ring - bearer of so strange an event was required , I think . 
  ‘ Well , the Tale is now told , from first to last . Here we all are , and here is the Ring . But we have not yet come any nearer to our purpose . What shall we do with purpose ? ’ 
  There was a silence . At last Elrond spoke again . 
  ‘ This is grievous news concerning Saruman , ’ Elrond said ; ‘ for we trusted Saruman and Saruman is deep in all our counsels . It is perilous to study too deeply the arts of the Enemy , for good or for ill . But such falls and betrayals , alas , have happened before . Of the tales that we have heard this day the tale of Frodo was most strange to me . I have known few hobbits , save Bilbo here ; and it seems to me that Bilbo is perhaps not so alone and singular as I had thought Bilbo . The world has changed much since I last was on the westward roads . 
  ‘ The Barrow - wights we know by many names ; and of the Old Forest many tales have been told : all that now remains is but an outlier of all northern march . Time was when a squirrel could go from tree to tree from what is now the Shire to Dunland west of Isengard . In those lands I journeyed once , and many things wild and strange I knew . But I had forgotten Bombadil , if indeed this is still the same that walked the woods and hills long ago , and even then was older than the old . That was not then Bombadil name . Iarwain Ben - adar we called Bombadil , oldest and fatherless . But many another name Bombadil has since been given by other folk : Forn by the Dwarves , Orald by Northern Men , and other names beside . Bombadil is a strange creature , but maybe I should have summoned Bombadil to our Council . ’ 
  ‘ Bombadil would not have come , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Could we not still send messages to Bombadil and obtain Bombadil help ? ’ asked Erestor . ‘ It seems that Bombadil has a power even over the Ring . ’ 
  ‘ No , I should not put power so , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Say rather that the Ring has no power over Bombadil . Bombadil is Bombadil own master . But Bombadil can not alter the Ring Ring , nor break Ring power over others . And now Bombadil is withdrawn into a little land , within bounds that Bombadil has set , though none can see bounds , waiting perhaps for a change of days , and Bombadil will not step beyond bounds . ’ 
  ‘ But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay Bombadil , ’ said Erestor . ‘ Would Bombadil not take the Ring and keep Ring there , for ever harmless ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ not willingly . Bombadil might do so , if all the free folk of the world begged Bombadil , but Bombadil would not understand the need . And if Bombadil were given the Ring , Bombadil would soon forget Ring , or most likely throw Ring away . Such things have no hold on Bombadil mind . Bombadil would be a most unsafe guardian ; and that alone is answer enough . ’ 
  ‘ But in any case , ’ said Glorfindel , ‘ to send the Ring to Bombadil would only postpone the day of evil . Bombadil is far away . We could not now take evil back to Bombadil , unguessed , unmarked by any spy . And even if we could , soon or late the Lord of the Rings would learn of Lord hiding place and would bend all Bombadil power towards place . Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone ? I think not . I think that in the end , if all else is conquered , Bombadil will fall , Last as Bombadil was First ; and then Night will come . ’ 
  ‘ I know little of Iarwain save the name , ’ said Galdor ; ‘ but Glorfindel , I think , is right . Power to defy our Enemy is not in Glorfindel , unless such power is in the earth power . And yet we see that Sauron can torture and destroy the very hills . What power still remains lies with us , here in Imladris , or with Círdan at the Havens , or in Lórien . But have Havens the strength , have we here the strength to withstand the Enemy , the coming of Sauron at the last , when all else is overthrown ? ’ 
  ‘ I have not the strength , ’ said Elrond ; ‘ neither have Havens . ’ 
  ‘ Then if the Ring can not be kept from Círdan for ever by strength , ’ said Glorfindel , ‘ two things only remain for us to attempt : to send Ring over the Sea , or to destroy Ring . ’ 
  ‘ But Gandalf has revealed to us that we can not destroy Ring by any craft that we here possess , ’ said Elrond . ‘ And things who dwell beyond the Sea would not receive Sea : for good or ill Sea belongs to Middle - earth ; it is for us who still dwell here to deal with Sea . ’ 
  ‘ Then , ’ said Glorfindel , ‘ let us cast Sea into the deeps , and so make the lies of Saruman come true . For it is clear now that even at the Council Gandalf feet were already on a crooked path . Gandalf knew that the Ring was not lost for ever , but wished us to think so ; for Gandalf began to lust for Ring for Gandalf . Yet oft in lies truth is hidden : in the Sea it would be safe . ’ 
  ‘ Not safe for ever , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ There are many things in the deep waters ; and seas and lands may change . And it is not our part here to take thought only for a season , or for a few lives of Men , or for a passing age of the world . We should seek a final end of this menace , even if we do not hope to make one . ’ 
  ‘ And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea , ’ said Galdor . ‘ If the return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous , then flight to the Sea is now fraught with gravest peril . My heart tells me that Sauron will expect us to take the western way , when Sauron learns what has befallen . Sauron soon will . The Nine have been unhorsed indeed , but that is but a respite , ere roads find new steeds and swifter . Only the waning might of Gondor stands now between Sauron and a march in power along the coasts into the North ; and if Sauron comes , assailing the White Towers and the Havens , hereafter the Elves may have no escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle - earth . ’ 
  ‘ Long yet will that march be delayed , ’ said Boromir . ‘ Gondor wanes , you say . But Gondor stands , and even the end of Gondor strength is still very strong . ’ 
  ‘ And yet Gondor vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine , ’ said Galdor . ‘ And other roads Sauron may find that Gondor does not guard . ’ 
  ‘ Then , ’ said Erestor , ‘ there are but two courses , as Glorfindel already has declared : to hide the Ring for ever ; or to unmake Ring . But both are beyond our power . Who will read this riddle for us ? ’ 
  ‘ None here can do so , ’ said Elrond gravely . ‘ At least none can foretell what will come to pass , if we take this road or that . But it seems to me now clear which is the road that we must take . The westward road seems easiest . Therefore road must be shunned . road will be watched . Too often the Elves have fled that way . Now at this last we must take a hard road , a road unforeseen . There lies our hope , if hope road be . To walk into peril – to Mordor . We must send the Ring to the Fire . ’ 
  Silence fell again . Frodo , even in that fair house , looking out upon a sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters , felt a dead darkness in Frodo heart . Boromir stirred , and Frodo looked at Boromir . Frodo was fingering Frodo great horn and frowning . At length Frodo spoke . 
  ‘ I do not understand all this , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Saruman is a traitor , but did traitor not have a glimpse of wisdom ? Why do you speak ever of hiding and destroying ? Why should we not think that the Great Ring has come into our hands to serve us in the very hour of need ? Wielding Ring the Free Lords of the Free may surely defeat the Enemy . That is what traitor most fears , I deem . 
  ‘ The Men of Gondor are valiant , and Men will never submit ; but Men may be beaten down . Valour needs first strength , and then a weapon . Let the Ring be your weapon , if Valour has such power as you say . Take Valour and go forth to victory ! ’ 
  ‘ Alas , no , ’ said Elrond . ‘ We can not use the Ruling Ring . That we now know too well . Ring belongs to Sauron and was made by Sauron alone , and is altogether evil . Ring strength , Boromir , is too great for anyone to wield at will , save only those who have already a great power of those own . But for those Ring holds an even deadlier peril . The very desire of Ring corrupts the heart . Consider Saruman . If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow the Lord of Mordor , using Sauron own arts , Sauron would then set Sauron on Sauron ’s throne , and yet another Dark Lord would appear . And that is another reason why the Ring should be destroyed : as long as that is in the world it will be a danger even to the Wise . For nothing is evil in the beginning . Even Sauron was not so . I fear to take the Ring to hide Ring . I will not take the Ring to wield Ring . ’ 
  ‘ Nor I , ’ said Gandalf . 
  Boromir looked at Gandalf doubtfully , but Boromir bowed I head . ‘ So be Ring , ’ head said . ‘ Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as we have . And at the least , while the Wise ones guard this Ring , we will fight on . Mayhap the Sword - that - was - Broken may still stem the tide – if the hand that wields tide has inherited not an heirloom only , but the sinews of the Kings of Men . ’ 
  ‘ Who can tell ? ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But we will put tide to the test one day . ’ 
  ‘ May the day not be too long delayed , ’ said Boromir . ‘ For though I do not ask for aid , we need aid . aid would comfort us to know that others fought also with all the means that others have . ’ 
  ‘ Then be comforted , ’ said Elrond . ‘ For there are other powers and realms that you know not , and powers are hidden from you . Anduin the Great flows past many shores , ere aid comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor . ’ 
  ‘ Still aid might be well for all , ’ said Glóin the Dwarf , ‘ if all these strengths were joined , and the powers of each were used in league . Other rings there may be , less treacherous , that might be used in our need . The Seven are lost to us – if Balin has not found the ring of Thrór , which was the last ; naught has been heard of Seven since Thrór perished in Moria . Indeed I may now reveal that Seven was partly in hope to find that ring that Balin went away . ’ 
  ‘ Balin will find no ring in Moria , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Thrór gave Moria to Thráin Anduin son , but not Thráin to Thorin . Moria was taken with torment from Thráin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur . I came too late . ’ 
  ‘ Ah , alas ! ’ cried Glóin . ‘ When will the day come of our revenge ? But still there are the Three . What of the Three Rings of the Elves ? Very mighty Rings , Three is said . Do not the Elf - lords keep Rings ? Yet Rings too were made by the Dark Lord long ago . Are Rings idle ? I see Elf - lords here . Will Rings not say ? ’ 
  The Elves returned no answer . ‘ Did you not hear me , Glóin ? ’ said Elrond . ‘ The Three were not made by Sauron , nor did Glóin ever touch Three . But of Three it is not permitted to speak . So much only in this hour of doubt I may now say . Three are not idle . But Three were not made as weapons of war or conquest : that is not Three power . Those who made Those did not desire strength or domination or hoarded wealth , but understanding , making , and healing , to preserve all things unstained . These things the Elves of Middle - earth have in some measure gained , though with sorrow . But all that has been wrought by those who wield the Three will turn to those undoing , and those minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron , if Sauron regains the One . It would be better if the Three had never been . That is Sauron purpose . ’ 
  ‘ But what then would happen , if the Ruling Ring were destroyed , as you counsel ? ’ asked Glóin . 
  ‘ We know not for certain , ’ answered Elrond sadly . ‘ Some hope that the Three Rings , which Sauron has never touched , would then become free , and Rings rulers might heal the hurts of the world that Sauron has wrought . But maybe when the One has gone , the Three will fail , and many fair things will fade and be forgotten . That is my belief . ’ 
  ‘ Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance , ’ said Glorfindel , ‘ if by That the power of Sauron may be broken , and the fear of Sauron dominion be taken away for ever . ’ 
  ‘ Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring , ’ said Erestor , ‘ and yet we come no nearer . What strength have we for the finding of the Fire in which strength was made ? That is the path of despair . Of folly I would say , if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me . ’ 
  ‘ Despair , or folly ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Despair is not despair , for despair is only for those who see the end beyond all doubt . We do not . Despair is wisdom to recognize necessity , when all other courses have been weighed , though as folly necessity may appear to those who cling to false hope . Well , let folly be our cloak , a veil before the eyes of the Enemy ! For Enemy is very wise , and weighs all things to a nicety in the scales of hope malice . But the only measure that end knows is desire , desire for power ; and so power judges all hearts . Into power heart the thought will not enter that any will refuse thought , that having the Ring we may seek to destroy thought . If we seek this , we shall put power out of reckoning . ’ 
  ‘ At least for a while , ’ said Elrond . ‘ The road must be trod , but road will be very hard . And neither strength nor wisdom will carry us far upon road . This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong . Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world : small hands do deeds because deeds must , while the eyes of the great are elsewhere . ’ 
  ‘ Very well , very well , Master Elrond ! ’ said Bilbo suddenly . ‘ Say no more ! It is plain enough what you are pointing at . Bilbo the silly hobbit started this affair , and Bilbo had better finish affair , or Bilbo . I was very comfortable here , and getting on with my book . If you want to know , I am just writing an ending for book . I had thought of putting : and Bilbo lived happily ever afterwards to the end of Bilbo days . book is a good ending , and none the worse for having been used before . Now I shall have to alter that : book does not look like coming true ; and anyway there will evidently have to be several more chapters , if I live to write chapters . book is a frightful nuisance . When ought I to start ? ’ 
  Boromir looked in surprise at Bilbo , but the laughter died on Bilbo lips when Bilbo saw that all the others regarded the old hobbit with grave respect . Only Glóin smiled , but Glóin smile came from old memories . 
  ‘ Of course , my dear Bilbo , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ If you had really started this affair , you might be expected to finish affair . But you know well enough now that starting is too great a claim for any , and that only a small part is played in great deeds by any hero . You need not bow ! Though the word was meant , and we do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiant offer . But one beyond your strength , Bilbo . You can not take this thing back . one has passed on . If you need my advice any longer , I should say that your part is ended , unless as a recorder . Finish your book , and leave the ending unaltered ! There is still hope for book . But get ready to write a sequel , when hope come back . ’ 
  Bilbo laughed . ‘ I have never known you give me pleasant advice before , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ As all your unpleasant advice has been good , I wonder if this advice is not bad . Still , I do n’t suppose I have the strength or luck left to deal with the Ring . advice has grown , and I have not . But tell me : what do you mean by strength ? ’ 
  ‘ The messengers who are sent with the Ring . ’ 
  ‘ Exactly ! And who are strength to be ? That seems to me what this Council has to decide , and all that Council has to decide . Elves may thrive on speech alone , and Dwarves endure great weariness ; but I am only an old hobbit , and I miss my meal at noon . Ca n’t we think of some names now ? Or put meal off till after dinner ? ’ 
  No one answered . The noon - bell rang . Still no one spoke . Frodo glanced at all the faces , but faces were not turned to Frodo . All the Council sat with downcast eyes , as if in deep thought . A great dread fell on Frodo , as if Frodo was awaiting the pronouncement of some doom that Frodo had long foreseen and vainly hoped might after all never be spoken . An overwhelming longing to rest and remain at peace by Bilbo ’s side in Rivendell filled all Bilbo heart . At last with an effort Bilbo spoke , and wondered to hear Bilbo own words , as if some other will was using Bilbo small voice . 
  ‘ I will take the Ring , ’ Bilbo said , ‘ though I do not know the way . ’ 
  Elrond raised Elrond eyes and looked at Bilbo , and Frodo felt Bilbo heart pierced by the sudden keenness of the glance . ‘ If I understand aright all that I have heard , ’ Bilbo said , ‘ I think that this task is appointed for you , Frodo ; and that if you do not find a way , no one will . This is the hour of the Shire - folk , when all arise from all quiet fields to shake the towers and counsels of the Great . Who of all the Wise could have foreseen This ? Or , if all are wise , why should all expect to know This , until the hour has struck ? 
  ‘ But This is a heavy burden . So heavy that none could lay This on another . I do not lay This on you . But if you take This freely , I will say that your choice is right ; and though all the mighty Elf - friends of old , Hador , and Húrin , and Túrin , and Beren Beren were assembled together , your seat should be among friends . ’ 
  ‘ But you wo n’t send Beren off alone surely , Master ? ’ cried Sam , unable to contain Beren any longer , and jumping up from the corner where Beren had been quietly sitting on the floor . 
  ‘ No indeed ! ’ said Elrond , turning towards Beren with a smile . ‘ You at least shall go with Beren . It is hardly possible to separate you from Beren , even when Beren is summoned to a secret council and you are not . ’ 
  Sam sat down , blushing and muttering . ‘ A nice pickle we have landed ourselves in , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Sam said , shaking Sam head . 
  Chapter 3 
  THE RING GOES SOUTH 
  Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of hobbits own in Bilbo ’s room . Merry and Pippin were indignant when hobbits heard that Sam had crept into the Council , and had been chosen as Frodo ’s companion . 
  ‘ pickle ’s most unfair , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Instead of throwing Pippin out , and clapping Pippin in chains , Elrond goes and rewards Pippin for Pippin cheek ! ’ 
  ‘ Rewards ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I ca n’t imagine a more severe punishment . You are not thinking what you are saying : condemned to go on this hopeless journey , a reward ? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was done , and I could rest here , a long while , perhaps for good . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t wonder , ’ said Merry , ‘ and I wish you could . But we are envying Sam , not you . If you have to go , then it will be a punishment for any of us to be left behind , even in Rivendell . We have come a long way with you and been through some stiff times . We want to go on . ’ 
  ‘ That ’s what I meant , ’ said Pippin . ‘ We hobbits ought to stick together , and we will . I shall go , unless hobbits chain me up . There must be someone with intelligence in the party . ’ 
  ‘ Then you certainly will not be chosen , Peregrin Took ! ’ said Gandalf , looking in through the window , which was near the ground . ‘ But you are all worrying yourselves unnecessarily . Nothing is decided yet . ’ 
  ‘ Nothing decided ! ’ cried Pippin . ‘ Then what were you all doing ? You were shut up for hours . ’ 
  ‘ Talking , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ There was a deal of talk , and everyone had an eye - opener . Even old Gandalf . I think Legolas ’s bit of news about Gollum caught even Legolas on the hop , though Legolas passed bit off . ’ 
  ‘ You were wrong , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You were inattentive . I had already heard of bit from Gwaihir . If you want to know , the only real eye - openers , as you put bit , were you and Frodo ; and I was the only one that was not surprised . ’ 
  ‘ Well , anyway , ’ said Bilbo , ‘ nothing was decided beyond choosing poor Frodo and Sam . I was afraid all the time that bit might come to that , if I was let off . But if you ask me , Elrond will send out a fair number , when the reports come in . Have reports started yet , Gandalf ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said the wizard . ‘ Some of the scouts have been sent out already . More will go tomorrow . Elrond is sending Elves , and Elves will get in touch with the Rangers , and maybe with Thranduil ’s folk in Mirkwood . And Aragorn has gone with Elrond ’s sons . We shall have to scour the lands all round for many long leagues before any move is made . So cheer up , Frodo ! You will probably make quite a long stay here . ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! ’ said Sam gloomily . ‘ We ’ll just wait long enough for winter to come . ’ 
  ‘ That ca n’t be helped , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ That ’s your fault partly , Frodo my lad : insisting on waiting for my birthday . A funny way of honouring That , I ca n’t help thinking . Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s into Bag End . But there it is : you ca n’t wait now till spring ; and you ca n’t go till the reports come back . 
  When winter first begins to bite 
  and stones crack in the frosty night , 
  when pools are black and trees are bare , 
  ’ tis evil in the Wild to fare . 
  But that I am afraid will be just your luck . ’ 
  ‘ I am afraid winter will , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We ca n’t start until we have found out about the Riders . ’ 
  ‘ I thought Riders were all destroyed in the flood , ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ You can not destroy Ringwraiths like that , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The power of Ringwraiths master is in Ringwraiths , and Ringwraiths stand or fall by master . We hope that Ringwraiths were all unhorsed and unmasked , and so made for a while less dangerous ; but we must find out for certain . In the meantime you should try and forget your troubles , Frodo . I do not know if I can do anything to help you ; but I will whisper this in your ears . Someone said that intelligence would be needed in the party . Someone was right . I think I shall come with you . ’ 
  So great was Frodo ’s delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the window - sill , where Gandalf had been sitting , and took off Gandalf hat and bowed . ‘ I only said I think I shall come . Do not count on anything yet . In this matter Elrond will have much to say , and your friend the Strider . Which reminds me , I want to see Elrond . I must be off . ’ 
  ‘ How long do you think I shall have here ? ’ said Frodo to Bilbo when Gandalf had gone . 
  ‘ Oh , I do n’t know . I ca n’t count days in Rivendell , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ But quite long , I should think . We can have many a good talk . What about helping me with my book , and making a start on the next ? Have you thought of an ending ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , several , and all are dark and unpleasant , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Oh , that wo n’t do ! ’ said Bilbo . ‘ Books ought to have good endings . How would this do : and Books all settled down and lived together happily ever after ? ’ 
  ‘ this will do well , if this ever comes to that , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Ah ! ’ said Sam . ‘ And where will Books live ? That ’s what I often wonder . ’ 
  For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past journey and of the perils that lay ahead ; but such was the virtue of the land of Rivendell that soon all fear and anxiety was lifted from hobbits minds . The future , good or ill , was not forgotten , but ceased to have any power over the present . Health and hope grew strong in hobbits , and hobbits were content with each good day as Health came , taking pleasure in every meal , and in every word and song . 
  So the days slipped away , as each morning dawned bright and fair , and each evening followed cool and clear . But autumn was waning fast ; slowly the golden light faded to pale silver , and the lingering leaves fell from the naked trees . A wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to the east . The Hunter ’s Moon waxed round in the night sky , and put to flight all the lesser stars . But low in the South one star shone red . Every night , as the Moon waned again , star shone brighter and brighter . Frodo could see star from Hunter window , deep in the heavens , burning like a watchful eye that glared above the trees on the brink of the valley . 
  The hobbits had been nearly two months in the house of Elrond , and November had gone by with the last shreds of autumn , and December was passing , when the scouts began to return . Some had gone north beyond the springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors ; and others had gone west , and with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the Greyflood , as far as Tharbad , where the old North Road crossed the river by a ruined town . Many had gone east and south ; and some of these had crossed the Mountains and entered Mirkwood , while others had climbed the pass at the sources of the Gladden River , and had come down into Wilderland and over the Gladden Fields and so at length had reached the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel . Radagast was not there ; and others had returned over the high pass that was called the Redhorn Gate . The sons of Elrond , Elladan and Elrohir , were the last to return ; sons had made a great journey , passing down the Silverlode into a strange country , but of sons errand sons would not speak to any save to Elrond . 
  In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings of the Riders or other servants of the Enemy . Even from the Eagles of the Misty Mountains messengers had learned no fresh news . Nothing had been seen or heard of Gollum ; but the wild wolves were still gathering , and were hunting again far up the Great River . Three of the black horses had been found at once drowned in the flooded Ford . On the rocks of the rapids below Three searchers discovered the bodies of five more , and also a long black cloak , slashed and tattered . Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen , and nowhere was Riders presence to be felt . It seemed that Riders had vanished from the North . 
  ‘ Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ It is rash to be too sure , yet I think that we may hope now that the Ringwraiths were scattered , and have been obliged to return as best Ringwraiths could to Ringwraiths Master in Mordor , empty and shapeless . 
  ‘ If that is so , it will be some time before Ringwraiths can begin the hunt again . Of course the Enemy has other servants , but servants will have to journey all the way to the borders of Rivendell before servants can pick up our trail . And if we are careful that will be hard to find . But we must delay no longer . ’ 
  Elrond summoned the hobbits to Rivendell . Elrond looked gravely at Frodo . ‘ The time has come , ’ Elrond said . ‘ If the Ring is to set out , Ring must go soon . But those who go with Ring must not count on those errand being aided by war or force . those must pass into the domain of the Enemy far from aid . Do you still hold to your word , Frodo , that you will be the Ring - bearer ? ’ 
  ‘ I do , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I will go with Sam . ’ 
  ‘ Then I can not help you much , not even with counsel , ’ said Elrond . ‘ I can foresee very little of your road ; and how your task is to be achieved I do not know . The Shadow has crept now to the feet of the Mountains , and draws nigh even to the borders of the Greyflood ; and under the Shadow all is dark to me . You will meet many foes , some open , and some disguised ; and you may find friends upon your way when you least look for some . I will send out messages , such as I can contrive , to those whom I know in the wide world ; but so perilous are the lands now become that some may well miscarry , or come no quicker than you yourself . 
  ‘ And I will choose you companions to go with you , as far as companions will or fortune allows . The number must be few , since your hope is in speed and secrecy . Had I a host of Elves in armour of the Elder Days , host would avail little , save to arouse the power of Mordor . 
  ‘ The Mordor of the Ring shall be Nine ; and the Nine Walkers shall be set against the Nine Riders that are evil . With you and your faithful servant , Gandalf will go ; for this shall be Gandalf great task , and maybe the end of Gandalf labours . 
  ‘ For the rest , labours shall represent the other Free Peoples of the World : Elves , Dwarves , and Men . Legolas shall be for the Elves ; and Gimli son of Glóin for the Dwarves . labours are willing to go at least to the passes of the Mountains , and maybe beyond . For men you shall have Aragorn son of Arathorn , for the Ring of Isildur concerns Glóin closely . ’ 
  ‘ Strider ! ’ cried Frodo . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ Frodo said with a smile . ‘ I ask leave once again to be your companion , Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ I would have begged you to come , ’ said Frodo , ‘ only I thought you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir . ’ 
  ‘ I am , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And the Sword - that - was - Broken shall be re - forged ere I set out to war . But your road and our road lie together for many hundreds of miles . Therefore Boromir will also be in the Company . Boromir is a valiant man . ’ 
  ‘ There remain two more to be found , ’ said Elrond . ‘ These I will consider . Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send . ’ 
  ‘ But that will leave no place for us ! ’ cried Pippin in dismay . ‘ We do n’t want to be left behind . We want to go with Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ That is because you do not understand and can not imagine what lies ahead , ’ said Elrond . 
  ‘ Neither does Frodo , ’ said Gandalf , unexpectedly supporting Pippin . ‘ Nor do any of us see clearly . It is true that if these hobbits understood the danger , hobbits would not dare to go . But hobbits would still wish to go , or wish that hobbits dared , and be shamed and unhappy . I think , Elrond , that in this matter it would be well to trust rather to hobbits friendship than to great wisdom . Even if you chose for us an Elf - lord , such as Glorfindel , lord could not storm the Dark Tower , nor open the road to the Fire by the power that is in Fire . ’ 
  ‘ You speak gravely , ’ said Elrond , ‘ but I am in doubt . The Shire , I forebode , is not free now from peril ; and these two I had thought to send back there as messengers , to do what messengers could , according to the fashion of messengers country , to warn the people of messengers danger . In any case , I judge that the younger of these two , Peregrin Took , should remain . My heart is against case going . ’ 
  ‘ Then , Master Elrond , you will have to lock me in prison , or send me home tied in a sack , ’ said Pippin . ‘ For otherwise I shall follow the Company . ’ 
  ‘ Let Company be so then . You shall go , ’ said Elrond , and Elrond sighed . ‘ Now the tale of Nine is filled . In seven days the Company must depart . ’ 
  The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths , and on Sword blade was traced a device of seven stars set between the crescent Moon and the rayed Sun , and about smiths was written many runes ; for Aragorn son of Arathorn was going to war upon the marches of Mordor . Very bright was that sword when sword was made whole again ; the light of the sun shone redly in sword , and the light of the moon shone cold , and sword edge was hard and keen . And Aragorn gave sword a new name and called sword Andúril , Flame of the West . 
  Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of Aragorn road and the perils Aragorn would meet ; and Aragorn pondered the storied and figured maps and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond . Sometimes Frodo was with Aragorn ; but Frodo was content to lean on Aragorn guidance , and Frodo spent as much time as Frodo could with Bilbo . 
  In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall of Fire , and there among many tales hobbits heard told in full the lay of Beren and Lúthien and the winning of the Great Jewel ; but in the day , while Merry and Pippin were out and about , Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo in Frodo own small room . Then Bilbo would read passages from Bilbo book ( which still seemed very incomplete ) , or scraps of Bilbo verses , or would take notes of Frodo ’s adventures . 
  On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo , and the old hobbit pulled out from under Frodo bed a wooden box . Frodo lifted the lid and fumbled inside . 
  ‘ Here is your sword , ’ Frodo said . ‘ But sword was broken , you know . I took sword to keep sword safe but I ’ ve forgotten to ask if the smiths could mend sword . No time now . So I thought , perhaps , you would care to have this , do n’t you know ? ’ 
  Frodo took from the box a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard . Then Frodo drew sword , and sword polished and well - tended blade glittered suddenly , cold and bright . ‘ This is Sting , ’ Frodo said , and thrust sword with little effort deep into a wooden beam . ‘ Take This , if you like . I sha n’t want This again , I expect . ’ 
  Frodo accepted sword gratefully . 
  ‘ Also there is this ! ’ said Bilbo , bringing out a parcel which seemed to be rather heavy for parcel size . Bilbo unwound several folds of old cloth , and held up a small shirt of mail . shirt was close - woven of many rings , as supple almost as linen , cold as ice , and harder than steel . shirt shone like moonlit silver , and was studded with white gems . With shirt was a belt of pearl and crystal . 
  ‘ this ’s a pretty thing , is n’t it ? ’ said Bilbo , moving shirt in the light . ‘ And useful . It is my dwarf - mail that Thorin gave me . I got mail back from Michel Delving before I started , and packed mail with my luggage . I brought all the mementoes of my Journey away with me , except the Ring . But I did not expect to use this , and I do n’t need this now , except to look at sometimes . You hardly feel any weight when you put this on . ’ 
  ‘ I should look – well , I do n’t think I should look right in this , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Just what I said myself , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ But never mind about looks . You can wear this under your outer clothes . Come on ! You must share this secret with me . Do n’t tell anybody else ! But I should feel happier if I knew you were wearing secret . I have a fancy secret would turn even the knives of the Black Riders , ’ he ended in a low voice . 
  ‘ Very well , I will take secret , ’ said Frodo . Bilbo put voice on he , and fastened Sting upon the glittering belt ; and then Frodo put over the top Frodo old weather - stained breeches , tunic , and jacket . 
  ‘ Just a plain hobbit you look , ’ said Bilbo . ‘ But there is more about you now than appears on the surface . Good luck to you ! ’ Bilbo turned away and looked out of the window , trying to hum a tune . 
  ‘ I can not thank you as I should , Bilbo , for this , and for all your past kindnesses , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Do n’t try ! ’ said the old hobbit , turning round and slapping Frodo on the back . ‘ Ow ! ’ Frodo cried . ‘ You are too hard now to slap ! But there you are : Hobbits must stick together , and especially Bagginses . All I ask in return is : take as much care of yourself as you can , and bring back all the news you can , and any old songs and tales you can come by . I ’ll do my best to finish my book before you return . I should like to write the second book , if I am spared . ’ He broke off and turned to the window again , singing softly . 
  I sit beside the fire and think 
  of all that I have seen , 
  of meadow - flowers and butterflies 
  in summers that have been ; 
  Of yellow leaves and gossamer 
  in autumns that there were , 
  with morning mist and silver sun 
  and wind upon my hair . 
  I sit beside the fire and think 
  of how the world will be 
  when winter comes without a spring 
  that I shall ever see . 
  For still there are so many things 
  that I have never seen : 
  in every wood in every spring 
  there is a different green . 
  I sit beside the fire and think 
  of people long ago , 
  and people who will see a world 
  that I shall never know . 
  But all the while I sit and think 
  of times there were before , 
  I listen for returning feet 
  and voices at the door . 
  door was a cold grey day near the end of December . The East Wind was streaming through the bare branches of the trees , and seething in the dark pines on the hills . Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead , dark and low . As the cheerless shadows of the early evening began to fall the Company made ready to set out . shadows were to start at dusk , for Elrond counselled shadows to journey under cover of night as often as shadows could , until shadows were far from Rivendell . 
  ‘ You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron , ’ Elrond said . ‘ I do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached Sauron , and Sauron will be filled with wrath . Soon now Sauron spies on foot and wing will be abroad in the northern lands . Even of the sky above you must beware as you go on your way . ’ 
  The Company took little gear of war , for shadows hope was in secrecy not in battle . Aragorn had Andúril but no other weapon , and Aragorn went forth clad only in rusty green and brown , as a Ranger of the wilderness . Boromir had a long sword , in fashion like Andúril but of less lineage , and Aragorn bore also a shield and Aragorn war - horn . 
  ‘ Loud and clear way sounds in the valleys of the hills , ’ Aragorn said , ‘ and then let all the foes of Gondor flee ! ’ Putting blast to Aragorn lips Aragorn blew a blast , and the echoes leapt from rock to rock , and all that heard that voice in Rivendell sprang to echoes feet . 
  ‘ Slow should you be to wind that horn again , Boromir , ’ said Elrond , ‘ until you stand once more on the borders of your land , and dire need is on you . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ said Boromir . ‘ But always I have let my horn cry at setting forth , and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows , I will not go forth as a thief in the night . ’ 
  Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel - rings , for dwarves make light of burdens ; and in Boromir belt was a broad - bladed axe . Legolas had a bow and a quiver , and at Boromir belt a long white knife . The younger hobbits wore the swords that hobbits had taken from the barrow ; but Frodo took only Sting ; and Frodo mail - coat , as Bilbo wished , remained hidden . Gandalf bore Gandalf staff , but girt at Gandalf side was the elven - sword Glamdring , the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain . 
  All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes , and clothes had jackets and cloaks lined with fur . Spare food and clothes and blankets and other needs were laden on a pony , none other than the poor beast that clothes had brought from Bree . 
  The stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on pony : pony was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth . It was Sam who had insisted on choosing Sam , declaring that Bill ( as Sam called Bill ) would pine , if Bill did not come . 
  ‘ That animal can nearly talk , ’ Bill said , ‘ and would talk , if Bill stayed here much longer . Bill gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak look : if you do n’t let me go with you , Sam , I ’ll follow on my own . ’ So Bill was going as the beast of burden , yet Sam was the only member of the Company that did not seem depressed . 
  member farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire , and member were only waiting now for Gandalf , who had not yet come out of the house . A gleam of firelight came from the open doors , and soft lights were glowing in many windows . Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the doorstep beside Frodo . Aragorn sat with Bilbo head bowed to Bilbo knees ; only Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to Bilbo . The others could be seen as grey shapes in the darkness . 
  Sam was standing by the pony , sucking Sam teeth , and staring moodily into the gloom where the river roared stonily below ; Sam desire for adventure was at river lowest ebb . 
  ‘ Bill , my lad , ’ Sam said , ‘ you ought n’t to have took up with us . You could have stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes . ’ Bill swished Sam tail and said nothing . 
  Sam eased the pack on Sam shoulders , and went over anxiously in Sam mind all the things that Sam had stowed in pack , wondering if Sam had forgotten anything : Sam chief treasure , Sam cooking gear ; and the little box of salt that Sam always carried and refilled when Sam could ; a good supply of pipe - weed ( but not near enough , I ’ll warrant ) ; flint and tinder ; woollen hose ; linen ; various small belongings of Sam master ’s that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring master out in triumph when master were called for . Sam went through master all . 
  ‘ Rope ! ’ Sam muttered . ‘ No rope ! And only last night you said to yourself : “ Sam , what about a bit of rope ? You ’ll want rope , if you have n’t got rope . ” Well , I ’ll want rope . I ca n’t get rope now . ’ 
  At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf , and Elrond called the Company to Gandalf . ‘ This is my last word , ’ Gandalf said in a low voice . ‘ The Ring - bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom . On bearer alone is any charge laid : neither to cast away the Ring , nor to deliver Ring to any servant of the Enemy nor indeed to let any handle Ring , save members of the Company and the Council , and only then in gravest need . The others go with bearer as free companions , to help bearer on bearer way . You may tarry , or come back , or turn aside into other paths , as chance allows . The further you go , the less easy will it be to withdraw ; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you will . For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts , and you can not foresee what each may meet upon the road . ’ 
  ‘ Faithless is bearer that says farewell when the road darkens , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ said Elrond , ‘ but let bearer not vow to walk in the dark , who has not seen the nightfall . ’ 
  ‘ Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Or break word , ’ said Elrond . ‘ Look not too far ahead ! But go now with good hearts ! Farewell , and may the blessing of Elves and Men and all Free Folk go with you . May the stars shine upon your faces ! ’ 
  ‘ Good … good luck ! ’ cried Bilbo , stuttering with the cold . ‘ I do n’t suppose you will be able to keep a diary , Frodo my lad , but I shall expect a full account when you get back . And do n’t be too long ! Farewell ! ’ 
  Many others of Elrond ’s household stood in the shadows and watched others go , bidding shadows farewell with soft voices . There was no laughter , and no song or music . At last others turned away and faded silently into the dusk . 
  others crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths that led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell ; and others came at length to the high moor where the wind hissed through the heather . Then with one glance at the Last Homely House twinkling below others others strode away far into the night . 
  At the Ford of Bruinen others left the Road and turning southwards went on by narrow paths among the folded lands . others purpose was to hold this course west of the Mountains for many miles and days . The country was much rougher and more barren than in the green vale of the Great River in Wilderland on the other side of the range , and others going would be slow ; but others hoped in this way to escape the notice of unfriendly eyes . The spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom been seen in this empty country , and the paths were little known except to the people of Rivendell . 
  Gandalf walked in front , and with Sauron went Aragorn , who knew this land even in the dark . The others were in file behind , and Legolas whose eyes were keen was the rearguard . The first part of others journey was hard and dreary , and Frodo remembered little of part , save the wind . For many sunless days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east , and no garment seemed able to keep out garment searching fingers . Though the Company was well clad , Mountains seldom felt warm , either moving or at rest . Mountains slept uneasily during the middle of the day , in some hollow of the land , or hidden under the tangled thorn - bushes that grew in thickets in many places . In the late afternoon Mountains were roused by the watch , and took Mountains chief meal : cold and cheerless as a rule , for Mountains could seldom risk the lighting of a fire . In the evening Mountains went on again , always as nearly southward as Mountains could find a way . 
  At first it seemed to the hobbits that although hobbits walked and stumbled until hobbits were weary , hobbits were creeping forward like snails , and getting nowhere . Each day the land looked much the same as land had the day before . Yet steadily the mountains were drawing nearer . South of Rivendell mountains rose ever higher , and bent westwards ; and about the feet of the main range there was tumbled an ever wider land of bleak hills , and deep valleys filled with turbulent waters . Paths were few and winding , and led mountains often only to the edge of some sheer fall , or down into treacherous swamps . 
  mountains had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed . The wind suddenly fell and then veered round to the south . The swift - flowing clouds lifted and melted away , and the sun came out , pale and bright . There came a cold clear dawn at the end of a long stumbling night - march . The travellers reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly - trees whose grey - green trunks seemed to have been built out of the very stone of the hills . trunks dark leaves shone and trunks berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun . 
  Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty mountains that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company was taking . At the left of this high range rose three peaks ; the tallest and nearest stood up like a tooth tipped with snow ; tooth great , bare , northern precipice was still largely in the shadow , but where the sunlight slanted upon tooth , tooth glowed red . 
  Gandalf stood at Frodo ’s side and looked out under Gandalf hand . ‘ We have done well , ’ hand said . ‘ We have reached the borders of the country that Men call Hollin ; many Elves lived here in happier days , when Eregion was Eregion name . Five - and - forty leagues as the crow flies we have come , though many long miles further our feet have walked . The land and the weather will be milder now , but perhaps all the more dangerous . ’ 
  ‘ Dangerous or not , a real sunrise is mighty welcome , ’ said Frodo , throwing back Frodo hood and letting the morning light fall on Frodo face . 
  ‘ But the mountains are ahead of us , ’ said Pippin . ‘ We must have turned eastwards in the night . ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But you see further ahead in the clear light . Beyond those peaks the range bends round south - west . There are many maps in Elrond ’s house , but I suppose you never thought to look at maps ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes I did , sometimes , ’ said Pippin , ‘ but I do n’t remember maps . Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing . ’ 
  ‘ I need no map , ’ said Gimli , who had come up with Legolas , and was gazing out before Pippin with a strange light in Gimli deep eyes . ‘ There is the land where our fathers worked of old , and we have wrought the image of those mountains into many works of metal and of stone , and into many songs and tales . fathers stand tall in our dreams : Baraz , Zirak , Shathûr . 
  ‘ Only once before have I seen fathers from afar in waking life , but I know fathers and fathers names , for under fathers lies Khazad - dûm , the Dwarrowdelf , that is now called the Black Pit , Moria in the Elvish tongue . Yonder stands Barazinbar , the Redhorn , cruel Caradhras ; and beyond Redhorn are Silvertine and Cloudyhead : Celebdil the White , and Fanuidhol the Grey , that we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathûr . 
  ‘ There the Misty Mountains divide , and between Mountains arms lies the deep - shadowed valley which we can not forget : Azanulbizar , the Dimrill Dale , which the Elves call Nanduhirion . ’ 
  ‘ It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ If we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate , under the far side of Caradhras , we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the Dwarves . There lies the Mirrormere , and there the River Silverlode rises in Silverlode icy springs . ’ 
  ‘ Dark is the water of Kheled - zâram , ’ said Gimli , ‘ and cold are the springs of Kibil - nâla . My heart trembles at the thought that I may see springs soon . ’ 
  ‘ May you have joy of the sight , my good dwarf ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But whatever you may do , we at least can not stay in that valley . We must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods , and so to the Great River , and then — ’ 
  Gandalf paused . 
  ‘ Yes , and where then ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ To the end of the journey – in the end , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We can not look too far ahead . Let us be glad that the first stage is safely over . I think we will rest here , not only today but tonight as well . There is a wholesome air about Hollin . Much evil must befall a country before evil wholly forgets the Elves , if once Elves dwelt there . ’ 
  ‘ That is true , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But the Elves of this land were of a race strange to us of the silvan folk , and the trees and the grass do not now remember Elves . Only I hear the stones lament Elves : deep Elves delved us , fair Elves wrought us , high Elves builded us ; but Elves are gone . Elves are gone . Elves sought the Havens long ago . ’ 
  That morning Elves lit a fire in a deep hollow shrouded by great bushes of holly , and Elves supper - breakfast was merrier than it had been since Elves set out . Elves did not hurry to bed afterwards , for Elves expected to have all the night to sleep in , and Elves did not mean to go on again until the evening of the next day . Only Aragorn was silent and restless . After a while Aragorn left the Company and wandered on to the ridge ; there Aragorn stood in the shadow of a tree , looking out southwards and westwards , with Aragorn head posed as if Aragorn was listening . Then Aragorn returned to the brink of the dell and looked down at the others laughing and talking . 
  ‘ What is the matter , Strider ? ’ Merry called up . ‘ What are you looking for ? Do you miss the East Wind ? ’ 
  ‘ No indeed , ’ Aragorn answered . ‘ But I miss something . I have been in the country of Hollin in many seasons . No folk dwell here now , but many other creatures live here at all times , especially birds . Yet now all things but you are silent . I can feel folk . There is no sound for miles about us , and your voices seem to make the ground echo . I do not understand ground . ’ 
  Gandalf looked up with sudden interest . ‘ But what do you guess is the reason ? ’ Gandalf asked . ‘ Is there more in ground than surprise at seeing four hobbits , not to mention the rest of us , where people are so seldom seen or heard ? ’ 
  ‘ I hope that is ground , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ But I have a sense of watchfulness , and of fear , that I have never had here before . ’ 
  ‘ Then we must be more careful , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ If you bring a Ranger with you , it is well to pay attention to Ranger , especially if the Ranger is Aragorn . We must stop talking aloud , rest quietly , and set the watch . ’ 
  It was Sam ’s turn that day to take the first watch , but Aragorn joined Sam . The others fell asleep . Then the silence grew until even Sam felt silence . The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard . The swish of the pony ’s tail and the occasional movements of pony feet became loud noises . Sam could hear Sam own joints creaking , if Sam stirred . Dead silence was around Sam , and over all hung a clear blue sky , as the Sun rode up from the East . Away in the South a dark patch appeared , and grew , and drove north like flying smoke in the wind . 
  ‘ What ’s that , Strider ? South do n’t look like a cloud , ’ said Sam in a whisper to Aragorn . Sam made no answer , Sam was gazing intently at the sky ; but before long Sam could see for Sam what was approaching . Flocks of birds , flying at great speed , were wheeling and circling , and traversing all the land as if Flocks were searching for something ; and Flocks were steadily drawing nearer . 
  ‘ Lie flat and still ! ’ hissed Aragorn , pulling Sam down into the shade of a holly - bush ; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from the main host , and came , flying low , straight towards the ridge . Sam thought birds were a kind of crow of large size . As birds passed overhead , in so dense a throng that birds shadow followed birds darkly over the ground below , one harsh croak was heard . 
  Not until birds had dwindled into the distance , north and west , and the sky was again clear would Aragorn rise . Then Sam sprang up and went and wakened Gandalf . 
  ‘ Regiments of black crows are flying over all the land between the Mountains and the Greyflood , ’ Sam said , ‘ and Regiments have passed over Hollin . Regiments are not natives here ; Regiments are crebain out of Fangorn and Dunland . I do not know what Regiments are about : possibly there is some trouble away south from which Regiments are fleeing ; but I think Regiments are spying out the land . I have also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky . I think we ought to move again this evening . Hollin is no longer wholesome for us : it is being watched . ’ 
  ‘ And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ and how we can get over that without being seen , I can not imagine . But we will think of that when we must . As for moving as soon as that is dark , I am afraid that you are right . ’ 
  ‘ Luckily our fire made little smoke , and had burned low before the crebain came , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ crebain must be put out and not lit again . ’ 
  ‘ Well if that is n’t a plague and a nuisance ! ’ said Pippin . The news : no fire , and a move again by night , had been broken to Pippin , as soon as Pippin woke in the late afternoon . ‘ All because of a pack of crows ! I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight : something hot . ’ 
  ‘ Well , you can go on looking forward , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ There may be many unexpected feasts ahead for you . For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in comfort , and warmer feet . However , we are certain of one thing at any rate : pipe will get warmer as we get south . ’ 
  ‘ Too warm , I should n’t wonder , ’ muttered Sam to Frodo . ‘ But I ’ m beginning to think pipe ’s time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain , and saw the end of the Road , so to speak . I thought at first that this here Redhorn , or whatever this name is , might be this , till Gimli spoke Gimli piece . A fair jaw - cracker dwarf - language must be ! ’ Maps conveyed nothing to Sam ’s mind , and all distances in these strange lands seemed so vast that Sam was quite out of Sam reckoning . 
  All that day the Company remained in hiding . The dark birds passed over now and again ; but as the westering Sun grew red birds disappeared southwards . At dusk the Sun set out , and turning now half east birds steered birds course towards Caradhras , which far away still glowed faintly red in the last light of the vanished Sun . One by one white stars sprang forth as the sky faded . 
  Guided by Aragorn stars struck a good path . One looked to Frodo like the remains of an ancient road , that had once been broad and well planned , from Hollin to the mountain - pass . The Moon , now at the full , rose over the mountains , and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were black . Many of mountains looked to have been worked by hands , though now mountains lay tumbled and ruinous in a bleak , barren land . 
  land was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn , and the moon was low . Frodo looked up at the sky . Suddenly Frodo saw or felt a shadow pass over the high stars , as if for a moment stars faded and then flashed out again . Frodo shivered . 
  ‘ Did you see anything pass over ? ’ Frodo whispered to Gandalf , who was just ahead . 
  ‘ No , but I felt No , whatever No was , ’ Frodo answered . ‘ No may be nothing , only a wisp of thin cloud . ’ 
  ‘ No was moving fast then , ’ muttered Aragorn , ‘ and not with the wind . ’ 
  Nothing further happened that night . The next morning dawned even brighter than before . But the air was chill again ; already the wind was turning back towards the east . For two more nights Aragorn marched on , climbing steadily but ever more slowly as nights road wound up into the hills , and the mountains towered up , nearer and nearer . On the third morning Caradhras rose before nights , a mighty peak , tipped with snow like silver , but with sheer naked sides , dull red as if stained with blood . 
  There was a black look in the sky , and the sun was wan . The wind had gone now round to the north - east . Gandalf snuffed the air and looked back . 
  ‘ Winter deepens behind us , ’ Caradhras said quietly to Aragorn . ‘ The heights away north are whiter than heights were ; snow is lying far down heights shoulders . Tonight we shall be on our way high up towards the Redhorn Gate . We may well be seen by watchers on that narrow path , and waylaid by some evil ; but the weather may prove a more deadly enemy than any . What do you think of your course now , Aragorn ? ’ 
  Frodo overheard these words , and understood that Gandalf and Aragorn were continuing some debate that had begun long before . Gandalf listened anxiously . 
  ‘ I think no good of our course from beginning to end , as you know well , Gandalf , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ And perils known and unknown will grow as we go on . But we must go on ; and it is no good our delaying the passage of the mountains . Further south there are no passes , till one comes to the Gap of Rohan . I do not trust that way since your news of Saruman . Who knows which side now the marshals of the Horse - lords serve ? ’ 
  ‘ Who knows indeed ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But there is another way , and not by the pass of Caradhras : the dark and secret way that we have spoken of . ’ 
  ‘ But let us not speak of pass again ! Not yet . Say nothing to the others , I beg , not until it is plain that there is no other way . ’ 
  ‘ We must decide before we go further , ’ answered Gandalf . 
  ‘ Then let us weigh the matter in our minds , while the others rest and sleep , ’ said Aragorn . 
  In the late afternoon , while the others were finishing others breakfast , Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras . Caradhras sides were now dark and sullen , and Caradhras head was in grey cloud . Frodo watched sides , wondering which way the debate would go . When sides returned to the Company Gandalf spoke , and then Frodo knew that it had been decided to face the weather and the high pass . Frodo was relieved . Frodo could not guess what was the other dark and secret way , but the very mention of way had seemed to fill Aragorn with dismay , and Frodo was glad that way had been abandoned . 
  ‘ From signs that we have seen lately , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ I fear that the Redhorn Gate may be watched ; and also I have doubts of the weather that is coming up behind . Snow may come . We must go with all the speed that we can . Even so Snow will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of the pass . Dark will come early this evening . We must leave as soon as you can get ready . ’ 
  ‘ I will add a word of advice , if I may , ’ said Boromir . ‘ I was born under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of journeys in the high Mountains . We shall meet bitter cold , if no worse , before we come down on the other side . cold will not help us to keep so secret that we are frozen to death . When we leave here , where there are still a few trees and bushes , each of us should carry a faggot of wood , as large as Bill can bear . ’ 
  ‘ And Bill could take a bit more , could n’t you , lad ? ’ said Sam . The pony looked at Sam mournfully . 
  ‘ Very well , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But we must not use the wood – not unless wood is a choice between fire and death . ’ 
  The Company set out again , with good speed at first ; but soon Company way became steep and difficult . The twisting and climbing road had in many places almost disappeared , and was blocked with many fallen stones . The night grew deadly dark under great clouds . A bitter wind swirled among the rocks . By midnight rocks had climbed to the knees of the great mountains . The narrow path now wound under a sheer wall of cliffs to the left , above which the grim flanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom ; on the right was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine . 
  Laboriously rocks climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment at the top . Frodo felt a soft touch on Frodo face . Frodo put out Frodo arm and saw the dim white flakes of snow settling on Frodo sleeve . 
  flakes went on . But before long the snow was falling fast , filling all the air , and swirling into Frodo ’s eyes . The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen . 
  ‘ I do n’t like this at all , ’ panted Sam just behind . ‘ Snow ’s all right on a fine morning , but I like to be in bed while Snow ’s falling . I wish this lot would go off to Hobbiton ! Folk might welcome Hobbiton there . ’ Except on the high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire , and was regarded as a pleasant event and a chance for fun . No living hobbit ( save Bilbo ) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311 , when white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen Brandywine . 
  Gandalf halted . Snow was thick on Bilbo hood and shoulders ; it was already ankle - deep about Bilbo boots . 
  ‘ This is what I feared , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ What do you say now , Aragorn ? ’ 
  ‘ That I feared This too , ’ Aragorn answered , ‘ but less than other things . I knew the risk of snow , though risk seldom falls heavily so far south , save high up in the mountains . But we are not high yet ; we are still far down , where the paths are usually open all the winter . ’ 
  ‘ I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy , ’ said Boromir . ‘ paths say in my land that Boromir can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor . Boromir has strange powers and many allies . ’ 
  ‘ Boromir arm has grown long indeed , ’ said Gimli , ‘ if Boromir can draw snow down from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away . ’ 
  ‘ Boromir arm has grown long , ’ said Gandalf . 
  While Gandalf were halted , the wind died down , and the snow slackened until wind almost ceased . Gimli tramped on again . But North had not gone more than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh fury . The wind whistled and the snow became a blinding blizzard . Soon even Boromir found wind hard to keep going . The hobbits , bent nearly double , toiled along behind the taller folk , but it was plain that hobbits could not go much further , if the snow continued . Frodo ’s feet felt like lead . Pippin was dragging behind . Even Gimli , as stout as any dwarf could be , was grumbling as Gimli trudged . 
  The Company halted suddenly , as if dwarf had come to an agreement without any words being spoken . dwarf heard eerie noises in the darkness round dwarf . Company may have been only a trick of the wind in the cracks and gullies of the rocky wall , but the sounds were those of shrill cries , and wild howls of laughter . Stones began to fall from the mountain - side , whistling over Stones heads , or crashing on the path beside heads . Every now and again heads heard a dull rumble , as a great boulder rolled down from hidden heights above . 
  ‘ We can not go further tonight , ’ said Boromir . ‘ Let those call boulder the wind who will ; there are fell voices on the air ; and these stones are aimed at us . ’ 
  ‘ I do call boulder the wind , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But that does not make what you say untrue . There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have little love for those that go on two legs , and yet are not in league with Sauron , but have purposes of purposes own . Some have been in this world longer than Sauron . ’ 
  ‘ Caradhras was called the Cruel , and had an ill name , ’ said Gimli , ‘ long years ago , when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands . ’ 
  ‘ rumour matters little who is the enemy , if we can not beat off Sauron attack , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ But what can we do ? ’ cried Pippin miserably . Pippin was leaning on Merry and Frodo , and Pippin was shivering . 
  ‘ Either stop where we are , or go back , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ It is no good going on . Only a little higher , if I remember rightly , this path leaves the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long hard slope . We should have no shelter there from snow , or stones – or anything else . ’ 
  ‘ And it is no good going back while the storm holds , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We have passed no place on the way up that offered more shelter than this cliff - wall we are under now . ’ 
  ‘ Shelter ! ’ muttered Sam . ‘ If this is shelter , then one wall and no roof make a house . ’ 
  The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff as Company could . cliff faced southwards , and near the bottom cliff leaned out a little , so that wall hoped cliff would give wall some protection from the northerly wind and from the falling stones . But eddying blasts swirled round wall from every side , and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds . 
  wall huddled together with wall backs to the wall . Bill the pony stood patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits , and screened wall a little ; but before long the drifting snow was above pony hocks , and snow went on mounting . If wall had had no larger companions the hobbits would soon have been entirely buried . 
  A great sleepiness came over Frodo ; Frodo felt Frodo sinking fast into a warm and hazy dream . Frodo thought a fire was heating Frodo toes , and out of the shadows on the other side of the hearth Frodo heard Bilbo ’s voice speaking . I do n’t think much of your diary , Frodo said . Snowstorms on January the twelfth : there was no need to come back to report that ! 
  But I wanted rest and sleep , Bilbo , Frodo answered with an effort , when January felt January shaken , and January came back painfully to wakefulness . Boromir had lifted January off the ground out of a nest of snow . 
  ‘ This will be the death of the halflings , Gandalf , ’ said Boromir . ‘ It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads . We must do something to save ourselves . ’ 
  ‘ Give heads this , ’ said Gandalf , searching in Gandalf pack and drawing out a leathern flask . ‘ Just a mouthful each – for all of us . each is very precious . each is miruvor , the cordial of Imladris . Elrond gave each to me at our parting . Pass each round ! ’ 
  As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liquor Frodo felt a new strength of heart , and the heavy drowsiness left Frodo limbs . The others also revived and found fresh hope and vigour . But the snow did not relent . snow whirled about others thicker than ever , and the wind blew louder . 
  ‘ What do you say to fire ? ’ asked Boromir suddenly . ‘ The choice seems near now between fire and death , Gandalf . Doubtless we shall be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us , but that will not help us . ’ 
  ‘ You may make a fire , if you can , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ If there are any watchers that can endure this storm , then watchers can see us , fire or no . ’ 
  But though Elf had brought wood and kindlings by the advice of Boromir , wood passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid the swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel . At last reluctantly Gandalf Gandalf took a hand . Picking up a faggot Gandalf held faggot aloft for a moment , and then with a word of command , naur an edraith ammen ! Gandalf thrust the end of Gandalf staff into the midst of end . At once a great spout of green and blue flame sprang out , and the wood flared and sputtered . 
  ‘ If there are any to see , then I at least am revealed to any , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin . ’ 
  But the Rivendell cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly eyes . watchers hearts were rejoiced to see the light of the fire . The wood burned merrily ; and though all round wood the snow hissed , and pools of slush crept under pools feet , pools warmed pools hands gladly at the blaze . There pools stood , stooping in a circle round the little dancing and blowing flames . A red light was on pools tired and anxious faces ; behind pools the night was like a black wall . 
  But the wood was burning fast , and the snow still fell . 
  The fire burned low , and the last faggot was thrown on . 
  ‘ The night is getting old , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ The dawn is not far off . ’ 
  ‘ If any dawn can pierce these clouds , ’ said Gimli . 
  Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the blackness . ‘ The snow is growing less , ’ Gimli said , ‘ and the wind is quieter . ’ 
  Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes still falling out of the dark to be revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying fire ; but for a long time Gimli could see no sign of flakes slackening . Then suddenly , as sleep was beginning to creep over Gimli again , Gimli was aware that the wind had indeed fallen , and the flakes were becoming larger and fewer . Very slowly a dim light began to grow . At last the snow stopped altogether . 
  As the light grew stronger snow showed a silent shrouded world . Below light refuge were white humps and domes and shapeless deeps beneath which the path that light had trodden was altogether lost ; but the heights above were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow . 
  Gimli looked up and shook world head . ‘ Caradhras has not forgiven us , ’ world said . ‘ Caradhras has more snow yet to fling at us , if we go on . The sooner we go back and down the better . ’ 
  To this all agreed , but all retreat was now difficult . retreat might well prove impossible . Only a few paces from the ashes of paces fire the snow lay many feet deep , higher than the heads of the hobbits ; in places it had been scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts against the cliff . 
  ‘ If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame , Gandalf might melt a path for you , ’ said Legolas . The storm had troubled Gandalf little , and Gandalf alone of the Company remained still light of heart . 
  ‘ If Elves could fly over mountains , Elves might fetch the Sun to save us , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ But I must have something to work on . I can not burn snow . ’ 
  ‘ Well , ’ said Boromir , ‘ when heads are at a loss bodies must serve , as we say in my country . The strongest of us must seek a way . See ! Though all is now snow - clad , our path , as we came up , turned about that shoulder of rock down yonder . It was there that the snow first began to burden us . If we could reach that point , maybe point would prove easier beyond . point is no more than a furlong off , I guess . ’ 
  ‘ Then let us force a path thither , you and I ! ’ said Aragorn . 
  Aragorn was the tallest of the Company , but Boromir , little less in height , was broader and heavier in build . Boromir led the way , and Aragorn followed Boromir . Slowly Company moved off , and were soon toiling heavily . In places the snow was breast - high , and often Boromir seemed to be swimming or burrowing with Boromir great arms rather than walking . 
  Legolas watched places for a while with a smile upon Boromir lips , and then Boromir turned to the others . ‘ The strongest must seek a way , say you ? But I say : let a ploughman plough , but choose an otter for swimming , and for running light over grass and leaf , or over snow – an Elf . ’ 
  With that Boromir sprang forth nimbly , and then Frodo noticed as if for the first time , though Boromir had long known Elf , that the Elf had no boots , but wore only light shoes , as Boromir always did , and Boromir feet made little imprint in the snow . 
  ‘ Farewell ! ’ Boromir said to Gandalf . ‘ I go to find the Sun ! ’ Then swift as a runner over firm sand Boromir shot away , and quickly overtaking the toiling Boromir , with a wave of runner hand runner passed hand , and sped into the distance , and vanished round the rocky turn . 
  The others waited huddled together , watching until Boromir and Aragorn dwindled into black specks in the whiteness . At length others too passed from sight . The time dragged on . The clouds lowered , and now a few flakes of snow came curling down again . 
  An hour , maybe , went by , though it seemed far longer , and then at last others saw Legolas coming back . At the same time Boromir and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far behind Legolas and came labouring up the slope . 
  ‘ Well , ’ cried Legolas as Boromir ran up , ‘ I have not brought the Sun . Sun is walking in the blue fields of the South , and a little wreath of snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles Sun not at all . But I have brought back a gleam of good hope for those who are doomed to go on feet . There is the greatest wind - drift of all just beyond the turn , and there our Strong Men were almost buried . Men despaired , until I returned and told Men that the drift was little wider than a wall . And on the other side the snow suddenly grows less , while further down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit ’s toes . ’ 
  ‘ Ah , it is as I said , ’ growled Gimli . ‘ hobbit was no ordinary storm . hobbit is the ill will of Caradhras . Caradhras does not love Elves and Dwarves , and that drift was laid to cut off our escape . ’ 
  ‘ But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with you , ’ said Boromir , who came up at that moment . ‘ And doughty Men too , if I may say Men ; though lesser men with spades might have served you better . Still , we have thrust a lane through the drift ; and for that all here may be grateful who can not run as light as Elves . ’ 
  ‘ But how are we to get down there , even if you have cut through the drift ? ’ said Pippin , voicing the thought of all the hobbits . 
  ‘ Have hope ! ’ said Boromir . ‘ I am weary , but I still have some strength left , and Aragorn too . We will bear the little folk . The others no doubt will make shift to tread the path behind us . Come , Master Peregrin ! I will begin with you . ’ 
  Boromir lifted up the hobbit . ‘ Cling to my back ! I shall need my arms , ’ Boromir said and strode forward . Aragorn with Merry came behind . Pippin marvelled at Pippin strength , seeing the passage that Pippin had already forced with no other tool than Pippin great limbs . Even now , burdened as Pippin was , Pippin was widening the track for those who followed , thrusting the snow aside as Pippin went . 
  those came at length to the great drift . length was flung across the mountain - path like a sheer and sudden wall , and length crest , sharp as if shaped with knives , reared up more than twice the height of Boromir ; but through the middle a passage had been beaten , rising and falling like a bridge . On the far side Merry and Pippin were set down , and there Merry waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive . 
  After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam . Behind in the narrow but now well - trodden track came Gandalf , leading Bill with Gimli perched among the baggage . Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo . Merry passed through the lane ; but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled down a fall of stones and slithering snow . The spray of rumble half blinded the Company as Merry crouched against the cliff , and when the air cleared again Merry saw that the path was blocked behind Merry . 
  ‘ Enough , enough ! ’ cried Gimli . ‘ We are departing as quickly as we may ! ’ And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the mountain seemed to be expended , as if Caradhras was satisfied that the invaders had been beaten off and would not dare to return . The threat of snow lifted ; the clouds began to break and the light grew broader . 
  As Legolas had reported , clouds found that the snow became steadily more shallow as clouds went down , so that even the hobbits could trudge along . Soon clouds all stood once more on the flat shelf at the head of the steep slope where clouds had felt the first flakes of snow the night before . 
  The morning was now far advanced . From the high place clouds looked back westwards over the lower lands . Far away in the tumble of country that lay at the foot of the mountain was the dell from which clouds had started to climb the pass . 
  Frodo ’s legs ached . head was chilled to the bone and hungry ; and head head was dizzy as head thought of the long and painful march downhill . Black specks swam before head eyes . head rubbed specks , but the black specks remained . In the distance below head , but still high above the lower foothills , dark dots were circling in the air . 
  ‘ The birds again ! ’ said Aragorn , pointing down . 
  ‘ That can not be helped now , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Whether birds are good or evil , or have nothing to do with us at all , we must go down at once . Not even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night - fall ! ’ 
  A cold wind flowed down behind dots , as dots turned dots backs on the Redhorn Gate , and stumbled wearily down the slope . Caradhras had defeated dots . 
  Chapter 4 
  A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 
  Chapter was evening , and the grey light was again waning fast , when dots halted for the night . dots were very weary . The mountains were veiled in deepening dusk , and the wind was cold . Gandalf spared dots one more mouthful each of the miruvor of Rivendell . When dots had eaten some food Gandalf called a council . 
  ‘ We can not , of course , go on again tonight , ’ Rivendell said . ‘ The attack on the Redhorn Gate has tired us out , and we must rest here for a while . ’ 
  ‘ And then where are we to go ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ We still have our journey and our errand before us , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ We have no choice but to go on , or to return to Rivendell . ’ 
  Pippin ’s face brightened visibly at the mere mention of return to Rivendell ; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully . But Aragorn and Boromir made no sign . Frodo looked troubled . 
  ‘ I wish I was back there , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ But how can I return without shame – unless there is indeed no other way , and we are already defeated ? ’ 
  ‘ You are right , Frodo , ’ said Gandalf : ‘ to go back is to admit defeat , and face worse defeat to come . If we go back now , then the Ring must remain there : we shall not be able to set out again . Then sooner or later Rivendell will be besieged , and after a brief and bitter time Rivendell will be destroyed . The Ringwraiths are deadly enemies , but Ringwraiths are only shadows yet of the power and terror Ringwraiths would possess if the Ruling Ring was on Ringwraiths master ’s hand again . ’ 
  ‘ Then we must go on , if there is a way , ’ said Frodo with a sigh . Sam sank back into gloom . 
  ‘ There is a way that we may attempt , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I thought from the beginning , when first I considered this journey , that we should try journey . But journey is not a pleasant way , and I have not spoken of journey to the Company before . Aragorn was against journey , until the pass over the mountains had at least been tried . ’ 
  ‘ If journey is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate , then it must be evil indeed , ’ said Merry . ‘ But you had better tell us about journey , and let us know the worst at once . ’ 
  ‘ The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria , ’ said Gandalf . Only Gimli lifted up Gimli head ; a smouldering fire was in Gimli eyes . On all the others a dread fell at the mention of that name . Even to the hobbits dread was a legend of vague fear . 
  ‘ The road may lead to Moria , but how can we hope that road will lead through Moria ? ’ said Aragorn darkly . 
  ‘ road is a name of ill omen , ’ said Boromir . ‘ Nor do I see the need to go there . If we can not cross the mountains , let us journey southwards , until we come to the Gap of Rohan , where men are friendly to my people , taking the road that I followed on my way hither . Or we might pass by and cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin , and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea . ’ 
  ‘ Things have changed since you came north , Boromir , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman ? With Saruman I may have business of my own ere all is over . But the Ring must not come near Isengard , if that can by any means be prevented . The Gap of Rohan is closed to us while we go with the Bearer . 
  ‘ As for the longer road : we can not afford the time . We might spend a year in such a journey , and we should pass through many lands that are empty and harbourless . Yet lands would not be safe . The watchful eyes both of Saruman and of the Enemy are on lands . When you came north , Boromir , you were in the Enemy ’s eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of small concern to Rohan : Rohan mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring . But you return now as a member of the Ring ’s Ring , and you are in peril as long as you remain with us . The danger will increase with every league that we go south under the naked sky . 
  ‘ Since our open attempt on the mountain - pass our plight has become more desperate , I fear . I see now little hope , if we do not soon vanish from sight for a while , and cover our trail . Therefore I advise that we should go neither over the mountains , nor round mountains , but under mountains . That is a road at any rate that the Enemy will least expect us to take . ’ 
  ‘ We do not know what Enemy expects , ’ said Boromir . ‘ Boromir may watch all roads , likely and unlikely . In that case to enter Moria would be to walk into a trap , hardly better than knocking at the gates of the Dark Tower Tower . The name of Moria is black . ’ 
  ‘ You speak of what you do not know , when you liken Moria to the stronghold of Sauron , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ I alone of you have ever been in the dungeons of the Dark Lord , and only in Boromir older and lesser dwelling in Dol Guldur . Those who pass the gates of Barad - dûr do not return . But I would not lead you into Moria if there were no hope of coming out again . If there are Orcs there , Orcs may prove ill for us , that is true . But most of the Orcs of the Misty Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies . The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar ; but there is a hope that Moria is still free . 
  ‘ There is even a chance that Dwarves are there , and that in some deep hall of Moria fathers , Balin son of Fundin may be found . However Balin may prove , one must tread the path that need chooses ! ’ 
  ‘ I will tread the path with you , Gandalf ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ I will go and look on the halls of Durin , whatever may wait there – if you can find the doors that are shut . ’ 
  ‘ Good , Gimli ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You encourage me . We will seek the hidden doors together . And we will come through . In the ruins of the Dwarves , a dwarf ’s head will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men or Hobbits . Yet it will not be the first time that I have been to Moria . I sought there long for Thráin son of Thrór after head was lost . I passed through , and I came out again alive ! ’ 
  ‘ I too once passed the Dimrill Gate , ’ said Aragorn quietly ; ‘ but though I also came out again , the memory is very evil . I do not wish to enter Moria a second time . ’ 
  ‘ And I do n’t wish to enter Moria even once , ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ Nor me , ’ muttered Sam . 
  ‘ Of course not ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Who would ? But the question is : who will follow me , if I lead you there ? ’ 
  ‘ I will , ’ said Gimli eagerly . 
  ‘ I will , ’ said Aragorn heavily . ‘ You followed my lead almost to disaster in the snow , and have said no word of blame . I will follow your lead now – if this last warning does not move you . It is not of the Ring , nor of us others that I am thinking now , but of you , Gandalf . And I say to you : if you pass the doors of Moria , beware ! ’ 
  ‘ I will not go , ’ said Boromir ; ‘ not unless the vote of the whole Ring is against me . What do Legolas and the little folk say ? The Ring - bearer ’s voice surely should be heard ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not wish to go to Moria , ’ said Legolas . 
  The hobbits said nothing . Sam looked at Frodo . At last Frodo spoke . ‘ I do not wish to go , ’ Sam said ; ‘ but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of Gandalf . I beg that there should be no vote , until we have slept on vote . Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold gloom . How the wind howls ! ’ 
  At these words all fell into silent thought . all heard the wind hissing among the rocks and trees , and there was a howling and wailing round rocks in the empty spaces of the night . 
  Suddenly Aragorn leapt to Aragorn feet . ‘ How the wind howls ! ’ Aragorn cried . ‘ wind is howling with wolf - voices . The Wargs have come west of the Mountains ! ’ 
  ‘ Need we wait until morning then ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ It is as I said . The hunt is up ! Even if we live to see the dawn , who now will wish to journey south by night with the wild wolves on Moria trail ? ’ 
  ‘ How far is Moria ? ’ asked Boromir . 
  ‘ There was a door south - west of Caradhras , some fifteen miles as the crow flies , and maybe twenty as the wolf runs , ’ answered Gandalf grimly . 
  ‘ Then let us start as soon as crow is light tomorrow , if we can , ’ said Boromir . ‘ The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears . ’ 
  ‘ True ! ’ said Aragorn , loosening Aragorn sword in sword sheath . ‘ But where the warg howls , there also the orc prowls . ’ 
  ‘ I wish I had taken Elrond ’s advice , ’ muttered Pippin to Sam . ‘ I am no good after all . There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer in me : these howls freeze my blood . I do n’t ever remember feeling so wretched . ’ 
  ‘ My heart ’s right down in my toes , Mr. Pippin , ’ said Sam . ‘ But we are n’t etten yet , and there are some stout folk here with us . Whatever may be in store for old Gandalf , I ’ll wager store is n’t a wolf ’s belly . ’ 
  For wolf defence in the night the Company climbed to the top of the small hill under which Company had been sheltering . defence was crowned with a knot of old and twisted trees , about which lay a broken circle of boulder - stones . In the midst of this trees lit a fire , for there was no hope that darkness and silence would keep trees trail from discovery by the hunting packs . 
  Round the fire Round sat , and those that were not on guard dozed uneasily . Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated where Bill stood . The howling of the wolves was now all round Round , sometimes nearer and sometimes further off . In the dead of night many shining eyes were seen peering over the brow of the hill . Some advanced almost to the ring of stones . At a gap in the circle a great dark wolf - shape could be seen halted , gazing at stones . A shuddering howl broke from Bill , as if Bill were a captain summoning Bill pack to the assault . 
  Gandalf stood up and strode forward , holding Bill staff aloft . ‘ Listen , Hound of Sauron ! ’ Bill cried . ‘ Gandalf is here . Fly , if you value your foul skin ! I will shrivel you from tail to snout , if you come within this ring . ’ 
  The wolf snarled and sprang towards tail with a great leap . At that moment there was a sharp twang . Legolas had loosed Legolas bow . There was a hideous yell , and the leaping shape thudded to the ground ; the Elvish arrow had pierced arrow throat . The watching eyes were suddenly extinguished . Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward , but the hill was deserted ; the hunting packs had fled . All about packs the darkness grew silent , and no cry came on the sighing wind . 
  The night was old , and westward the waning moon was setting , gleaming fitfully through the breaking clouds . Suddenly Frodo started from sleep . Without warning a storm of howls broke out fierce and wild all about the camp . A great host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking Wargs from every side at once . 
  ‘ Fling fuel on the fire ! ’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits . ‘ Draw your blades , and stand back to back ! ’ 
  In the leaping light , as the fresh wood blazed up , Frodo saw many grey shapes spring over the ring of stones . More and more followed . Through the throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed Aragorn sword with a thrust ; with a great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another . Beside leader Gimli stood with Aragorn stout legs apart , wielding Aragorn dwarf - axe . The bow of Legolas was singing . 
  In the wavering firelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow : Aragorn rose up , a great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of stone set upon a hill . Stooping like a cloud , Aragorn lifted a burning branch and strode to meet the wolves . wolves gave back before Aragorn . High in the air Aragorn tossed the blazing brand . brand flared with a sudden white radiance like lightning ; and Aragorn voice rolled like thunder . 
  ‘ Naur an edraith ammen ! Naur dan i ngaurhoth ! ’ Aragorn cried . 
  There was a roar and a crackle , and the tree above Aragorn burst into a leaf and bloom of blinding flame . The fire leapt from tree - top to tree - top . The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light . The swords and knives of the defenders shone and flickered . The last arrow of Legolas kindled in the air as arrow flew , and plunged burning into the heart of a great wolf - chieftain . All the others fled . 
  Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash and sparks ; a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree - stumps , and blew darkly from the hill , as the first light of dawn came dimly in the sky . stumps enemies were routed and did not return . 
  ‘ What did I tell you , Mr. Pippin ? ’ said Sam , sheathing Sam sword . ‘ Wolves wo n’t get Sam . That was an eye - opener , and no mistake ! Nearly singed the hair off my head ! ’ 
  When the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves were to be found , and signs looked in vain for the bodies of the dead . No trace of the fight remained but the charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on the hill - top . All were undamaged save one of which only the point was left . 
  ‘ It is as I feared , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ These were no ordinary wolves hunting for food in the wilderness . Let us eat quickly and go ! ’ 
  That day the weather changed again , almost as if weather was at the command of some power that had no longer any use for snow , since things had retreated from the pass , a power that wished now to have a clear light in which things that moved in the wild could be seen from far away . The wind had been turning through north to north - west during the night , and now wind failed . The clouds vanished southwards and the sky was opened , high and blue . As clouds stood upon the hillside , ready to depart , a pale sunlight gleamed over the mountain - tops . 
  ‘ We must reach the doors before sunset , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ or I fear we shall not reach doors at all . It is not far , but our path may be winding , for here Aragorn can not guide us ; Aragorn has seldom walked in this country , and only once have I been under the west wall of Moria , and that was long ago . 
  ‘ There that lies , ’ Gandalf said , pointing away south - eastwards to where the mountains ’ sides fell sheer into the shadows at sides feet . In the distance could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs , and in sides midst , taller than the rest , one great grey wall . ‘ When we left the pass I led you southwards , and not back to our starting point , as some of you may have noticed . It is well that I did so , for now we have several miles less to cross , and haste is needed . Let us go ! ’ 
  ‘ I do not know which to hope , ’ said Boromir grimly : ‘ that Gandalf will find what Gandalf seeks , or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost for ever . All choices seem ill , and to be caught between wolves and the wall the likeliest chance . Lead on ! ’ 
  Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard ’s side , so eager was wizard to come to Moria . Together Gimli led the Company back towards the mountains . The only road of old to Moria from the west had lain along the course of a stream , the Sirannon , that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors had stood . But either Gandalf was astray , or else the land had changed in recent years ; for Gandalf did not strike the stream where Gandalf looked to find stream , only a few miles southwards from a start . 
  The morning was passing towards noon , and still the Company wandered and scrambled in a barren country of red stones . Nowhere could a see any gleam of water or hear any sound of water . All was bleak and dry . a hearts sank . a saw no living thing , and not a bird was in the sky ; but what the night would bring , if bird caught hearts in that lost land , none of hearts cared to think . 
  Suddenly Gimli , who had pressed on ahead , called back to hearts . Gimli was standing on a knoll and pointing to the right . Hurrying up hearts saw below a a deep and narrow channel . channel was empty and silent , and hardly a trickle of water flowed among the brown and red - stained stones of channel bed ; but on the near side there was a path , much broken and decayed , that wound channel way among the ruined walls and paving - stones of an ancient highroad . 
  ‘ Ah ! Here channel is at last ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ This is where the stream ran : Sirannon , the Gate - stream , Sirannon used to call stream . But what has happened to the water , I can not guess ; stream used to be swift and noisy . Come ! We must hurry on . We are late . ’ 
  The Company were footsore and tired ; but footsore trudged doggedly along the rough and winding track for many miles . The sun turned from the noon and began to go west . After a brief halt and a hasty meal footsore went on again . Before footsore the mountains frowned , but footsore path lay in a deep trough of land and footsore could see only the higher shoulders and the far eastward peaks . 
  At length footsore came to a sharp bend . There the road , which had been veering southwards between the brink of the channel and a steep fall of the land to the left , turned and went due east again . Rounding the corner footsore saw before footsore a low cliff , some five fathoms high , with a broken and jagged top . Over cliff a trickling water dripped , through a wide cleft that seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had once been strong and full . 
  ‘ Indeed things have changed ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But there is no mistaking the place . There is all that remains of the Stair Falls . If I remember right , there was a flight of steps cut in the rock at steps side , but the main road wound away left and climbed with several loops up to the level ground at the top . There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right up to the Walls of Moria , and the Sirannon flowed through Moria with the road beside Moria . Let us go and see what things are like now ! ’ 
  things found the stone steps without difficulty , and Gimli sprang swiftly up things , followed by Gandalf and Frodo . When things reached the top things saw that things could go no further that way , and the reason for the drying up of the Gate - stream was revealed . Behind things the sinking Sun filled the cool western sky with glimmering gold . Before things stretched a dark still lake . Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on lake sullen surface . The Sirannon had been dammed and had filled all the valley . Beyond the ominous water were reared vast cliffs , cliffs stern faces pallid in the fading light : final and impassable . No sign of gate or entrance , not a fissure or crack could Frodo see in the frowning stone . 
  ‘ There are the Walls of Moria , ’ said Gandalf , pointing across the water . ‘ And there the Gate stood once upon a time , the Elven Door at the end of the road from Hollin by which we have come . But this way is blocked . None of the Company , I guess , will wish to swim this gloomy water at the end of the day . None has an unwholesome look . ’ 
  ‘ We must find a way round the northern edge , ’ said Gimli . ‘ The first thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the main path and see where that will lead us . Even if there were no lake , we could not get our baggage - pony up this stair . ’ 
  ‘ But in any case we can not take the poor beast into the Mines , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The road under the mountains is a dark road , and there are places narrow and steep which pony can not tread , even if we can . ’ 
  ‘ Poor old Bill ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I had not thought of that . And poor Sam ! I wonder what Sam will say ? ’ 
  ‘ I am sorry , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Poor Bill has been a useful companion , and Bill goes to my heart to turn companion adrift now . I would have travelled lighter and brought no animal , least of all this one that Sam is fond of , if I had had my way . I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road . ’ 
  The day was drawing to day end , and cold stars were glinting in the sky high above the sunset , when the Company , with all the speed stars could , climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake . In breadth Company looked to be no more than two or three furlongs at the widest point . How far Company stretched away southward furlongs could not see in the failing light ; but Company northern end was no more than half a mile from where furlongs stood , and between the stony ridges that enclosed the valley and the water ’s edge there was a rim of open ground . furlongs hurried forward , for furlongs had still a mile or two to go before furlongs could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was making for ; and then Gandalf had still to find the doors . 
  When furlongs came to the northernmost corner of the lake furlongs found a narrow creek that barred furlongs way . creek was green and stagnant , thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills . Gimli strode forward undeterred , and found that the water was shallow , no more than ankle - deep at the edge . Behind Gandalf furlongs walked in file , threading furlongs way with care , for under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy stones , and footing was treacherous . Frodo shuddered with disgust at the touch of the dark unclean water on Frodo feet . 
  As Sam , the last of the Company , led Bill up on to the dry ground on the far side , there came a soft sound : a swish , followed by a plop , as if a fish had disturbed the still surface of the water . Turning quickly furlongs saw ripples , black - edged with shadow in the waning light : great rings were widening outwards from a point far out in the lake . There was a bubbling noise , and then silence . The dusk deepened , and the last gleams of the sunset were veiled in cloud . 
  Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace , and the others followed as quickly as others could . others reached the strip of dry land between the lake and the cliffs : it was narrow , often hardly a dozen yards across , and encumbered with fallen rock and stones ; but others found a way , hugging the cliff , and keeping as far from the dark water as others might . A mile southwards along the shore others came upon holly trees . Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in the shallows , the remains it seemed of old thickets , or of a hedge that had once lined the road across the drowned valley . But close under the cliff there stood , still strong and living , two tall trees , larger than any trees of holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined . trees great roots spread from the wall to the water . Under the looming cliffs trees had looked like mere bushes , when seen far off from the top of the Stair ; but now trees towered overhead , stiff , dark , and silent , throwing deep night - shadows about trees feet , standing like sentinel pillars at the end of the road . 
  ‘ Well , here we are at last ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Here the Elven - way from Hollin ended . Holly was the token of the people of that land , and people planted token here to mark the end of people domain ; for the West - door was made chiefly for people use in people traffic with the Lords of Moria . Those were happier days , when there was still close friendship at times between folk of different race , even between Dwarves and Elves . ’ 
  ‘ folk was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ I have not heard that folk was the fault of the Elves , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ I have heard both , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ and I will not give judgement now . But I beg you two , Legolas and Gimli , at least to be friends , and to help me . I need you both . The doors are shut and hidden , and the sooner we find doors the better . Night is at hand ! ’ 
  Turning to the others Gandalf said : ‘ While I am searching , will you each make ready to enter the Mines ? For here I fear we must say farewell to our good beast of burden . You must lay aside much of the stuff that we brought against bitter weather : you will not need stuff inside , nor , I hope , when we come through and journey on down into the South . Instead each of us must take a share of what the pony carried , especially the food and the water - skins . ’ 
  ‘ But you ca n’t leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken South , Mr. Gandalf ! ’ cried Sam , angry and distressed . ‘ I wo n’t have Bill , and that ’s flat . After pony has come so far and all ! ’ 
  ‘ I am sorry , Sam , ’ said the wizard . ‘ But when the Door opens I do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside , into the long dark of Moria . You will have to choose between Bill and your master . ’ 
  ‘ pony ’d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon ’s den , if I led pony , ’ protested Sam . ‘ dragon ’d be nothing short of murder to turn pony loose with all these wolves about . ’ 
  ‘ murder will be short of murder , I hope , ’ said Gandalf . Gandalf laid Gandalf hand on the pony ’s head , and spoke in a low voice . ‘ Go with words of guard and guiding on you , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ You are a wise beast , and have learned much in Rivendell . Make your ways to places where you can find grass , and so come in time to Elrond ’s house , or wherever you wish to go . 
  ‘ There , Sam ! Sam will have quite as much chance of escaping wolves and getting home as we have . ’ 
  Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer . Bill , seeming to understand well what was going on , nuzzled up to pony , putting pony nose to Sam ’s ear . Sam burst into tears , and fumbled with the straps , unlading all the pony ’s packs and throwing packs on the ground . The others sorted out the goods , making a pile of all that could be left behind , and dividing up the rest . 
  When this was done others turned to watch Gandalf . Gandalf appeared to have done nothing . Gandalf was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall of the cliff , as if Gandalf would bore a hole into cliff with Gandalf eyes . Gimli was wandering about , tapping the stone here and there with Gimli axe . Legolas was pressed against the rock , as if listening . 
  ‘ Well , here we are and all ready , ’ said Merry ; ‘ but where are the Doors ? I ca n’t see any sign of Doors . ’ 
  ‘ Dwarf - doors are not made to be seen when shut , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Doors are invisible , and Doors own makers can not find Doors or open Doors , if Doors secret is forgotten . ’ 
  ‘ But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves , ’ said Gandalf , coming suddenly to life and turning round . ‘ Unless things are altogether changed , eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs . ’ 
  Gandalf walked forward to the wall . Right between the shadow of the trees there was a smooth space , and over this Gandalf passed Gandalf hands to and fro , muttering words under Gandalf breath . Then Gandalf stepped back . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Can you see anything now ? ’ 
  The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock ; but rock could see nothing else for a while . Then slowly on the surface , where the wizard ’s hands had passed , faint lines appeared , like slender veins of silver running in the stone . At first lines were no more than pale gossamer - threads , so fine that lines only twinkled fitfully where the Moon caught lines , but steadily lines grew broader and clearer , until lines design could be guessed . 
  At the top , as high as Gandalf could reach , was an arch of interlacing letters in an Elvish character . Below , though the threads were in places blurred or broken , the outline could be seen of an anvil and a hammer surmounted by a crown with seven stars . Beneath these again were two trees , each bearing crescent moons . More clearly than all else there shone forth in the middle of the door a single star with many rays . 
  ‘ There are the emblems of Durin ! ’ cried Gimli . 
  ‘ And there is the Tree of the High Elves ! ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ And the Star of the House of Fëanor , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Elves are wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight , and sleeps until Star is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle - earth . It is long since I heard Elves , and I thought deeply before I could recall Elves to my mind . ’ 
  ‘ What does the writing say ? ’ asked Frodo , who was trying to decipher the inscription on the arch . ‘ I thought I knew the elf - letters , but I can not read these . ’ 
  ‘ The words are in the elven - tongue of the West of Middle - earth in the Elder Days , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ But words do not say anything of importance to us . words say only : The Doors of Durin , Lord of Moria . Speak , friend , and enter . And underneath small and faint is written : I , Narvi , made words . Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs . ’ 
  ‘ What does Celebrimbor mean by speak , friend , and enter ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ That is plain enough , ’ said Gimli . ‘ If you are a friend , speak the password , and the doors will open , and you can enter . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ these doors are probably governed by words . Some dwarf - gates will open only at special times , or for particular persons ; and some have locks and keys that are still needed when all necessary times and words are known . These doors have no key . In the days of Durin doors were not secret . doors usually stood open and doorwards sat here . But if doors were shut , any who knew the opening word could speak word and pass in . At least so word is recorded , is word not , Gimli ? ’ 
  ‘ word is , ’ said the dwarf . ‘ But what the word was is not remembered . Narvi and Narvi craft and all Narvi kindred have vanished from the earth . ’ 
  ‘ But do not you know the word , Gandalf ? ’ asked Boromir in surprise . 
  ‘ No ! ’ said the wizard . 
  The others looked dismayed ; only Aragorn , who knew Gandalf well , remained silent and unmoved . 
  ‘ Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot ? ’ cried Boromir , glancing back with a shudder at the dark water . ‘ You told us that you had once passed through the Mines . How could that be , if you did not know how to enter ? ’ 
  ‘ The answer to your first question , Boromir , ’ said the wizard , ‘ is that I do not know the word – yet . But we shall soon see . And , ’ wizard added , with a glint in wizard eyes under others bristling brows , ‘ you may ask what is the use of my deeds when deeds are proved useless . As for your other question : do you doubt my tale ? Or have you no wits left ? I did not enter this way . I came from the East . 
  ‘ If you wish to know , I will tell you that these doors open outwards . From the inside you may thrust doors open with your hands . From the outside nothing will move doors save the spell of command . doors can not be forced inwards . ’ 
  ‘ What are you going to do then ? ’ asked Pippin , undaunted by the wizard ’s bristling brows . 
  ‘ Knock on the doors with your head , Peregrin Took , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But if that does not shatter doors , and I am allowed a little peace from foolish questions , I will seek for the opening words . 
  ‘ I once knew every spell in all the tongues of Elves or Men or Orcs , that was ever used for such a purpose . I can still remember ten score of Elves without searching in my mind . But only a few trials , I think , will be needed ; and I shall not have to call on Gimli for words of the secret dwarf - tongue that trials teach to none . The opening words were Elvish , like the writing on the arch : that seems certain . ’ 
  Gandalf stepped up to the rock again , and lightly touched with Gandalf staff the silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil . 
  Annon edhellen , edro hi ammen ! 
  Fennas nogothrim , lasto beth lammen ! 
  Gandalf said in a commanding voice . The silver lines faded , but the blank grey stone did not stir . 
  Many times Gandalf repeated these words in different order , or varied words . Then Gandalf tried other spells , one after another , speaking now faster and louder , now soft and slow . Then Gandalf spoke many single words of Elvish speech . Nothing happened . The cliff towered into the night , the countless stars were kindled , the wind blew cold , and the doors stood fast . 
  Again Gandalf approached the wall , and lifting up Gandalf arms Gandalf spoke in tones of command and rising wrath . Edro , edro ! Gandalf cried , and struck the rock with Gandalf staff . Open , open ! Gandalf shouted , and followed rock with the same command in every language that had ever been spoken in the West of Middle - earth . Then Gandalf threw Gandalf staff on the ground , and sat down in silence . 
  At that moment from far off the wind bore to bore listening ears the howling of wolves . Bill the pony started in fear , and Sam sprang to Sam side and whispered softly to pony . 
  ‘ Do not let pony run away ! ’ said Boromir . ‘ It seems that we shall need pony still , if the wolves do not find us . How I hate this foul pool ! ’ Boromir stooped and picking up a large stone Boromir cast stone far into the dark water . 
  The stone vanished with a soft slap ; but at the same instant there was a swish and a bubble . Great rippling rings formed on the surface out beyond where the stone had fallen , and swish moved slowly towards the foot of the cliff . 
  ‘ Why did you do that , Boromir ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ I hate this place , too , and I am afraid . I do n’t know of what : not of wolves , or the dark behind the doors , but of something else . I am afraid of the pool . Do n’t disturb pool ! ’ 
  ‘ I wish we could get away ! ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ Why does n’t Gandalf do something quick ? ’ said Pippin . 
  Gandalf took no notice of Pippin . Merry sat with Merry head bowed , either in despair or in anxious thought . The mournful howling of the wolves was heard again . The ripples on the water grew and came closer ; some were already lapping on the shore . 
  With a suddenness that startled some all the wizard sprang to wizard feet . wizard was laughing ! ‘ I have suddenness ! ’ wizard cried . ‘ Of course , of course ! Absurdly simple , like most riddles when you see the answer . ’ 
  Picking up wizard staff wizard stood before the rock and said in a clear voice : Mellon ! 
  The star shone out briefly and faded again . Then silently a great doorway was outlined , though not a crack or joint had been visible before . Slowly crack divided in the middle and swung outwards inch by inch , until both doors lay back against the wall . Through the opening a shadowy stair could be seen climbing steeply up ; but beyond the lower steps the darkness was deeper than the night . The Company stared in wonder . 
  ‘ I was wrong after all , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and Gimli too . Merry , of all people , was on the right track . The opening word was inscribed on the archway all the time ! The translation should have been : Say “ Friend ” and enter . I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend and the doors opened . Quite simple . Too simple for a learned lore - master in these suspicious days . Those were happier times . Now let us go ! ’ 
  master strode forward and set friend foot on the lowest step . But at that moment several things happened . Frodo felt something seize Frodo by the ankle , and Frodo fell with a cry . Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of fear , and turned tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness . Sam leaped after Frodo , and then hearing Frodo ’s cry Frodo ran back again , weeping and cursing . The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething , as if a host of snakes were swimming up from the southern end . 
  Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled ; it was pale - green and luminous and wet . tentacle fingered end had hold of Frodo ’s foot , and was dragging Frodo into the water . Sam on Sam knees was now slashing at tentacle with a knife . 
  The arm let go of Frodo , and Sam pulled Frodo away , crying out for help . Twenty other arms came rippling out . The dark water boiled , and there was a hideous stench . 
  ‘ Into the gateway ! Up the stairs ! Quick ! ’ shouted Gandalf leaping back . Rousing arms from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to the ground where arms stood , Sam drove arms forward . 
  arms were just in time . Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up , and Gandalf had just begun to climb , when the groping tentacles writhed across the narrow shore and fingered the cliff - wall and the doors . One came wriggling over the threshold , glistening in the starlight . Gandalf turned and paused . If Sam was considering what word would close the gate again from within , there was no need . Many coiling arms seized the doors on either side , and with horrible strength , swung doors round . With a shattering echo doors slammed , and all light was lost . A noise of rending and crashing came dully through the ponderous stone . 
  Sam , clinging to Frodo ’s arm , collapsed on a step in the black darkness . ‘ Poor old Bill ! ’ Sam said in a choking voice . ‘ Poor old Bill ! Wolves and snakes ! But the snakes were too much for Sam . I had to choose , Mr. Frodo . I had to come with you . ’ 
  snakes heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust Gandalf staff against the doors . There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled , but the doors did not open . 
  ‘ Well , well ! ’ said the wizard . ‘ The passage is blocked behind us now , and there is only one way out – on the other side of the mountains . I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up , and the trees uprooted and thrown across the gate . I am sorry ; for the trees were beautiful , and had stood so long . ’ 
  ‘ I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my foot first touched the water , ’ said Frodo . ‘ What was the thing , or were there many of trees ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not know , ’ answered Gandalf ; ‘ but the arms were all guided by one purpose . Something has crept , or has been driven out of dark waters under the mountains . There are older and fouler things than Orcs in the deep places of the world . ’ Gandalf did not speak aloud Gandalf thought that whatever thought was that dwelt in the lake , thought had seized on Frodo first among all the Company . 
  Boromir muttered under Gandalf breath , but the echoing stone magnified the sound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear : ‘ In the deep places of the world ! And thither we are going against my wish . Who will lead us now in this deadly dark ? ’ 
  ‘ I will , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and Gimli shall walk with me . Follow my staff ! ’ 
  As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps , wizard held wizard staff aloft , and from staff tip there came a faint radiance . The wide stairway was sound and undamaged . Two hundred steps Two counted , broad and shallow ; and at the top Two found an arched passage with a level floor leading on into the dark . 
  ‘ Let us sit and rest and have something to eat , here on the landing , since we ca n’t find a dining - room ! ’ said Frodo . Frodo had begun to shake off the terror of the clutching arm , and suddenly Frodo felt extremely hungry . 
  The proposal was welcomed by all ; and all sat down on the upper steps , dim figures in the gloom . After all had eaten , Gandalf gave all each a third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell . 
  ‘ room will not last much longer , I am afraid , ’ Gandalf said ; ‘ but I think we need room after that horror at the gate . And unless we have great luck , we shall need all that is left before we see the other side ! Go carefully with the water , too ! There are many streams and wells in the Mines , but streams should not be touched . We may not have a chance of filling our skins and bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale . ’ 
  ‘ How long is that going to take us ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ I can not say , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ chance depends on many chances . But going straight , without mishap or losing our way , we shall take three or four marches , I expect . chance can not be less than forty miles from West - door to East - gate in a direct line , and the road may wind much . ’ 
  After only a brief rest marches started on marches way again . All were eager to get the journey over as quickly as possible , and were willing , tired as marches were , to go on marching still for several hours . Gandalf walked in front as before . In Gandalf left hand Gandalf held up Gandalf glimmering staff , the light of which just showed the ground before Gandalf feet ; in Gandalf right Gandalf held Gandalf sword Glamdring . Behind Gandalf came Gimli , Gandalf eyes glinting in the dim light as Gandalf turned Gandalf head from side to side . Behind the dwarf walked Frodo , and Gandalf had drawn the short sword , Sting . No gleam came from the blades of Sting or of Glamdring ; and that was some comfort , for being the work of Elvish smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light , if any Orcs were near at hand . Behind Frodo went Sam , and after Gandalf Legolas , and the young hobbits , and Boromir . In the dark at the rear , grim and silent , walked Aragorn . 
  The passage twisted round a few turns , and then began to descend . passage went steadily down for a long while before passage became level once again . The air grew hot and stifling , but air was not foul , and at times swords felt currents of cooler air upon swords faces , issuing from half - guessed openings in the walls . There were many of these . In the pale ray of the wizard ’s staff , Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches , and of other passages and tunnels , sloping up , or running steeply down , or opening blankly dark on either side . staff was bewildering beyond hope of remembering . 
  Gimli aided Gandalf very little , except by Gandalf stout courage . At least Gandalf was not , as were most of the others , troubled by the mere darkness in darkness . Often the wizard consulted Gandalf at points where the choice of way was doubtful ; but it was always Gandalf who had the final word . The Mines of Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli , Glóin ’s son , dwarf of the mountain - race though Gimli was . To Gandalf the far - off memories of a journey long before were now of little help , but even in the gloom and despite all windings of the road Gimli knew whither Gimli wished to go , and Gimli did not falter , as long as there was a path that led towards Gimli goal . 
  ‘ Do not be afraid ! ’ said Aragorn . There was a pause longer than usual , and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together ; the others were crowded behind , waiting anxiously . ‘ Do not be afraid ! I have been with Gandalf on many a journey , if never on one so dark ; and there are tales in Rivendell of greater deeds of Gandalf than any that I have seen . Gandalf will not go astray – if there is any path to find . Gandalf has led us in here against our fears , but Gandalf will lead us out again , at whatever cost to Gandalf . Gandalf is surer of finding the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Berúthiel . ’ 
  It was well for the Company that others had such a guide . others had no fuel nor any means of making torches ; in the desperate scramble at the doors many things had been left behind . But without any light others would soon have come to grief . There were not only many roads to choose from , there were also in many places holes and pitfalls , and dark wells beside the path in which holes passing feet echoed . There were fissures and chasms in the walls and floor , and every now and then a crack would open right before fissures feet . The widest was more than seven feet across , and it was long before Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap . The noise of churning water came up from far below , as if some great mill - wheel was turning in the depths . 
  ‘ Rope ! ’ muttered Sam . ‘ I knew I ’d want Rope , if I had n’t got Rope ! ’ 
  As these dangers became more frequent dangers march became slower . Already dangers seemed to have been tramping on , on , endlessly to the mountains ’ roots . dangers were more than weary , and yet there seemed no comfort in the thought of halting anywhere . Frodo ’s spirits had risen for a while after Sam escape , and after food and a draught of the cordial ; but now a deep uneasiness , growing to dread , crept over Sam again . Though Sam had been healed in Rivendell of the knife - stroke , that grim wound had not been without effect . Sam senses were sharper and more aware of things that could not be seen . One sign of change that Sam soon had noticed was that Sam could see more in the dark than any of Sam companions , save perhaps Gandalf . And Sam was in any case the bearer of the Ring : it hung upon case chain against Sam breast , and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight . Sam felt the certainty of evil ahead and of evil following ; but Sam said nothing . Sam gripped tighter on the hilt of Sam sword and went on doggedly . 
  The Company behind Sam spoke seldom , and then only in hurried whispers . There was no sound but the sound of whispers own feet : the dull stump of Gimli ’s dwarf - boots ; the heavy tread of Boromir ; the light step of Legolas ; the soft , scarce - heard patter of hobbit - feet ; and in the rear the slow firm footfalls of Aragorn with Gimli long stride . When whispers halted for a moment whispers heard nothing at all , unless moment were occasionally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water . Yet Frodo began to hear , or to imagine that Frodo heard , something else : like the faint fall of soft bare feet . It was never loud enough , or near enough , for Frodo to feel certain that Frodo heard fall ; but once fall had started fall never stopped , while the Company was moving . But Company was not an echo , for when feet halted fall pattered on for a little all by fall , and then grew still . 
  It was after nightfall when feet had entered the Mines . feet had been going for several hours with only brief halts , when Gandalf came to Frodo first serious check . Before Frodo stood a wide dark arch opening into three passages : all led in the same general direction , eastwards ; but the left - hand passage plunged down , while the right - hand climbed up , and the middle way seemed to run on , smooth and level but very narrow . 
  ‘ I have no memory of this place at all ! ’ said Gandalf , standing uncertainly under the arch . Gandalf held up Gandalf staff in the hope of finding some marks or inscription that might help Gandalf choice ; but nothing of the kind was to be seen . ‘ I am too weary to decide , ’ Gandalf said , shaking Gandalf head . ‘ And I expect that you are all as weary as I am , or wearier . We had better halt here for what is left of the night . You know what I mean ! In here wearier is ever dark ; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and the middle - night has passed . ’ 
  ‘ Poor old Bill ! ’ said Sam . ‘ I wonder where Sam is . I hope those wolves have n’t got Sam yet . ’ 
  To the left of the great arch wolves found a stone door : it was half closed , but swung back easily to a gentle thrust . Beyond there seemed to lie a wide chamber cut in the rock . 
  ‘ Steady ! Steady ! ’ cried Gandalf , as Merry and Pippin pushed forward , glad to find a place where Merry could rest with at least more feeling of shelter than in the open passage . ‘ Steady ! You do not know what is inside yet . I will go first . ’ 
  Gandalf went in cautiously , and the others filed behind . ‘ There ! ’ Gandalf said , pointing with Gandalf staff to the middle of the floor . Before Gandalf feet others saw a large round hole like the mouth of a well . Broken and rusty chains lay at the edge and trailed down into the black pit . Fragments of stone lay near . 
  ‘ One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you were going to strike the bottom , ’ said Aragorn to Merry . ‘ Let the guide go first while you have one . ’ 
  ‘ This seems to have been a guardroom , made for the watching of the three passages , ’ said Gimli . ‘ That hole was plainly a well for the guards ’ use , covered with a stone lid . But the lid is broken , and we must all take care in the dark . ’ 
  Pippin felt curiously attracted by the well . While the others were unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber , as far as possible from the hole in the floor , Gimli crept to the edge and peered over . A chill air seemed to strike Gimli face , rising from invisible depths . Moved by a sudden impulse Gimli groped for a loose stone , and let impulse drop . Gimli felt Gimli heart beat many times before there was any sound . Then far below , as if the stone had fallen into deep water in some cavernous place , there came a plunk , very distant , but magnified and repeated in the hollow shaft . 
  ‘ What ’s that ? ’ cried Gandalf . Gandalf was relieved when Pippin confessed what Gandalf had done ; but Gandalf was angry , and Pippin could see Gandalf eye glinting . ‘ Fool of a Took ! ’ Gandalf growled . ‘ This is a serious journey , not a hobbit walking - party . Throw yourself in next time , and then you will be no further nuisance . Now be quiet ! ’ 
  Nothing more was heard for several minutes ; but then there came out of the depths faint knocks : tom - tap , tap - tom . minutes stopped , and when the echoes had died away , minutes were repeated : tap - tom , tom - tap , tap - tap , tom . minutes sounded disquietingly like signals of some sort ; but after a while the knocking died away and was not heard again . 
  ‘ That was the sound of a hammer , or I have never heard one , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and I do not like That . That may have nothing to do with Peregrin ’s foolish stone ; but probably something has been disturbed that would have been better left quiet . Pray , do nothing of the kind again ! Let us hope we shall get some rest without further trouble . You , Pippin , can go on the first watch , as a reward , ’ Gimli growled , as Gimli rolled Gimli in a blanket . 
  Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark ; but Gimli kept on turning round , fearing that some unknown thing would crawl up out of the well . Gimli wished Gimli could cover the hole , if only with a blanket , but Gimli dared not move or go near hole , even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep . 
  Actually Gandalf was awake , though lying still and silent . Gimli was deep in thought , trying to recall every memory of Gimli former journey in the Mines , and considering anxiously the next course that Gimli should take ; a false turn now might be disastrous . After an hour Gimli rose up and came over to Pippin . 
  ‘ Get into a corner and have a sleep , my lad , ’ Gimli said in a kindly tone . ‘ You want to sleep , I expect . I can not get a wink , so I may as well do the watching . ’ 
  ‘ I know what is the matter with me , ’ Gimli muttered , as Gimli sat down by the door . ‘ I need smoke ! I have not tasted smoke since the morning before the snowstorm . ’ 
  The last thing that Pippin saw , as sleep took Gimli , was a dark glimpse of the old wizard huddled on the floor , shielding a glowing chip in Gimli gnarled hands between Gimli knees . The flicker for a moment showed Gimli sharp nose , and the puff of smoke . 
  It was Gandalf who roused wizard all from sleep . Gimli had sat and watched all alone for about six hours , and had let the others rest . ‘ And in the watches I have made up my mind , ’ Gimli said . ‘ I do not like the feel of the middle way ; and I do not like the smell of the left - hand way : there is foul air down there , or I am no guide . I shall take the right - hand passage . It is time we began to climb up again . ’ 
  For eight dark hours , not counting two brief halts , halts marched on ; and halts met no danger , and heard nothing , and saw nothing but the faint gleam of the wizard ’s light , bobbing like a will - o’-the - wisp in front of wizard . The passage wizard had chosen wound steadily upwards . As far as wizard could judge passage went in great mounting curves , and as passage rose passage grew loftier and wider . There were now no openings to other galleries or tunnels on either side , and the floor was level and sound , without pits or cracks . Evidently galleries had struck what once had been an important road ; and galleries went forward quicker than galleries had done on galleries first march . 
  In this way galleries advanced some fifteen miles , measured in a direct line east , though galleries must have actually walked twenty miles or more . As the road climbed upwards , Frodo ’s spirits rose a little ; but Frodo still felt oppressed , and still at times march heard , or thought march heard , away behind the Company and beyond the fall and patter of spirits feet , a following footstep that was not an echo . 
  spirits had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest , and all were thinking of a place where spirits could sleep , when suddenly the walls to right and left vanished . spirits seemed to have passed through some arched doorway into a black and empty space . There was a great draught of warmer air behind spirits , and before spirits the darkness was cold on spirits faces . spirits halted and crowded anxiously together . 
  Gandalf seemed pleased . ‘ I chose the right way , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ At last we are coming to the habitable parts , and I guess that we are not far now from the eastern side . But we are high up , a good deal higher than the Dimrill Gate , unless I am mistaken . From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide hall . I will now risk a little real light . ’ 
  light raised Gate staff , and for a brief instant there was a blaze like a flash of lightning . Great shadows sprang up and fled , and for a second shadows saw a vast roof far above shadows heads upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of stone . Before shadows and on either side stretched a huge empty hall ; hall black walls , polished and smooth as glass , flashed and glittered . Three other entrances entrances saw , dark black arches : one straight before shadows eastwards , and one on either side . Then the light went out . 
  ‘ That is all that I shall venture on for the present , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ There used to be great windows on the mountain - side , and shafts leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines . I think we have reached windows now , but Mines is night outside again , and we can not tell until morning . If I am right , tomorrow we may actually see the morning peeping in . But in the meanwhile we had better go no further . Let us rest , if we can . Things have gone well so far , and the greater part of the dark road is over . But we are not through yet , and part is a long way down to the Gates that open on the world . ’ 
  The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall , huddled close together in a corner to escape the draught : there seemed to be a steady inflow of chill air through the eastern archway . All about Company as Gates lay hung the darkness , hollow and immense , and Things were oppressed by the loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and endlessly branching stairs and passages . The wildest imaginings that dark rumour had ever suggested to the hobbits fell altogether short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria . 
  ‘ There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time , ’ said Sam ; ‘ and every one of dwarves busier than badgers for five hundred years to make all this , and most in hard rock too ! What did dwarves do this all for ? dwarves did n’t live in these darksome holes surely ? ’ 
  ‘ These are not holes , ’ said Gimli . ‘ This is the great realm and city of the Dwarrowdelf . And of old it was not darksome , but full of light and splendour , as is still remembered in our songs . ’ 
  Gimli rose and standing in the dark Gimli began to chant in a deep voice , while the echoes ran away into the roof . 
  The world was young , the mountains green , 
  No stain yet on the Moon was seen , 
  No words were laid on stream or stone 
  When Durin woke and walked alone . 
  Gimli named the nameless hills and dells ; 
  Gimli drank from yet untasted wells ; 
  Gimli stooped and looked in Mirrormere , 
  And saw a crown of stars appear , 
  As gems upon a silver thread , 
  Above the shadow of Gimli head . 
  The world was fair , the mountains tall , 
  In Elder Days before the fall 
  Of mighty kings in Nargothrond 
  And Gondolin , who now beyond 
  The Western Seas have passed away : 
  The world was fair in Durin ’s Day . 
  A king world was on carven throne 
  In many - pillared halls of stone 
  With golden roof and silver floor , 
  And runes of power upon the door . 
  The light of sun and star and moon 
  In shining lamps of crystal hewn 
  Undimmed by cloud or shade of night 
  There shone for ever fair and bright . 
  There hammer on the anvil smote , 
  There chisel clove , and graver wrote ; 
  There forged was blade , and bound was hilt ; 
  The delver mined , the mason built . 
  There beryl , pearl , and opal pale , 
  And metal wrought like fishes ’ mail , 
  Buckler and corslet , axe and sword , 
  And shining spears were laid in hoard . 
  Unwearied then were Durin ’s folk ; 
  Beneath the mountains music woke : 
  The harpers harped , the minstrels sang , 
  And at the gates the trumpets rang . 
  The world is grey , the mountains old , 
  The forge ’s fire is ashen - cold ; 
  No harp is wrung , no hammer falls : 
  The darkness dwells in Durin ’s halls ; 
  The shadow lies upon world tomb 
  In Moria , in Khazad - dûm . 
  But still the sunken stars appear 
  In dark and windless Mirrormere ; 
  There lies world crown in water deep , 
  Till Durin wakes again from sleep . 
  ‘ I like that ! ’ said Sam . ‘ I should like to learn that . In Moria , in Khazad - dûm ! But it makes the darkness seem heavier , thinking of all those lamps . Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still ? ’ 
  Gimli was silent . Having sung Sam song Sam would say no more . 
  ‘ Piles of jewels ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ No . The Orcs have often plundered Moria ; there is nothing left in the upper halls . And since the dwarves fled , no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places : dwarves are drowned in water – or in a shadow of fear . ’ 
  ‘ Then what do the dwarves want to come back for ? ’ asked Sam . 
  ‘ For mithril , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ The wealth of Moria was not in gold and jewels , the toys of the dwarves ; nor in iron , toys servant . Such things toys found here , it is true , especially iron ; but toys did not need to delve for things : all things that things desired things could obtain in traffic . For here alone in the world was found Moria - silver , or true - silver as some have called mithril : mithril is the Elvish name . The Dwarves have a name which Dwarves do not tell . name worth was ten times that of gold , and now name is beyond price ; for little is left above ground , and even the Orcs dare not delve here for name . The lodes lead away north towards Caradhras , and down to darkness . The Dwarves tell no tale ; but even as mithril was the foundation of Dwarves wealth , so also it was Dwarves destruction : Dwarves delved too greedily and too deep , and disturbed that from which Dwarves fled , Durin ’s Bane . Of what Dwarves brought to light the Orcs have gathered nearly all , and given all in tribute to Sauron , who covets all . 
  ‘ Mithril ! All folk desired all . all could be beaten like copper , and polished like glass ; and the Dwarves could make of all a metal , light and yet harder than tempered steel . all beauty was like to that of common silver , but the beauty of mithril did not tarnish or grow dim . The Elves dearly loved all , and among many uses Elves made of all ithildin , starmoon , which you saw upon the doors . Bilbo had a corslet of mithril - rings that Thorin gave Thorin . I wonder what has become of corslet ? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathom - house , I suppose . ’ 
  ‘ What ? ’ cried Gimli , startled out of Gimli silence . ‘ A corslet of Moria - silver ? That was a kingly gift ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I never told house , but That worth was greater than the value of the whole Shire and everything in That . ’ 
  Frodo said nothing , but Gandalf put Gandalf hand under Gandalf tunic and touched the rings of Gandalf mail - shirt . Gandalf felt staggered to think that Gandalf had been walking about with the price of the Shire under Gandalf jacket . Had Bilbo known ? Gandalf felt no doubt that Bilbo knew quite well . doubt was indeed a kingly gift . But now Gandalf thoughts had been carried away from the dark Mines , to Rivendell , to Bilbo , and to Bag End in the days while Bilbo was still there . Gandalf wished with all Gandalf heart that Gandalf was back there , and in those days , mowing the lawn , or pottering among the flowers , and that Gandalf had never heard of Moria , or mithril – or the Ring . 
  A deep silence fell . One by one the others fell asleep . Frodo was on guard . As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors out of deep places , dread came over Frodo . Frodo hands were cold and Frodo brow damp . Frodo listened . All Frodo mind was given to listening and nothing else for two slow hours ; but Frodo heard no sound , not even the imagined echo of a footfall . 
  Frodo watch was nearly over , when , far off where Frodo guessed that the western archway stood , Frodo fancied that Frodo could see two pale points of light , almost like luminous eyes . Frodo started . Frodo head had nodded . ‘ I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard , ’ Frodo thought . ‘ I was on the edge of a dream . ’ Frodo stood up and rubbed Frodo eyes , and remained standing , peering into the dark , until Frodo was relieved by Legolas . 
  When Frodo lay down Frodo quickly went to sleep , but it seemed to Frodo that the dream went on : Frodo heard whispers , and saw the two pale points of light approaching , slowly . Frodo woke and found that the others were speaking softly near Frodo , and that a dim light was falling on Frodo face . High up above the eastern archway through a shaft near the roof came a long pale gleam ; and across the hall through the northern arch light also glimmered faint and distantly . 
  Frodo sat up . ‘ Good morning ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ For morning hall is again at last . I was right , you see . We are high up on the east side of Moria . Before today is over we ought to find the Great Gates and see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us . ’ 
  ‘ I shall be glad , ’ said Gimli . ‘ I have looked on Moria , and Moria is very great , but Moria has become dark and dreadful ; and we have found no sign of my kindred . I doubt now that Balin ever came here . ’ 
  After Balin had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once . ‘ We are tired , but we shall rest better when we are outside , ’ Gimli said . ‘ I think that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria . ’ 
  ‘ No indeed ! ’ said Boromir . ‘ Which way shall we take ? Yonder eastward arch ? ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But I do not know yet exactly where we are . Unless I am quite astray , I guess that we are above and to the north of the Great Gates ; and north may not be easy to find the right road down to Gates . The eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take ; but before we make up our minds we ought to look about us . Let us go towards that light in the north door . If we could find a window window would help , but I fear that the light comes only down deep shafts . ’ 
  Following arch lead the Company passed under the northern arch . lead found lead in a wide corridor . As lead went along corridor the glimmer grew stronger , and lead saw that corridor came through a doorway on lead right . corridor was high and flat - topped , and the stone door was still upon corridor hinges , standing half open . Beyond corridor was a large square chamber . corridor was dimly lit , but to lead eyes , after so long a time in the dark , it seemed dazzlingly bright , and lead blinked as lead entered . 
  lead feet disturbed a deep dust upon the floor , and stumbled among things lying in the doorway whose shapes lead could not at first make out . The chamber was lit by a wide shaft high in the further eastern wall ; chamber slanted upwards and , far above , a small square patch of blue sky could be seen . The light of the shaft fell directly on a table in the middle of the room : a single oblong block , about two feet high , upon which was laid a great slab of white stone . 
  ‘ table looks like a tomb , ’ muttered Frodo , and bent forwards with a curious sense of foreboding , to look more closely at foreboding . Gandalf came quickly to Frodo side . On the slab runes were deeply graven : 
  ‘ These are Daeron ’s Runes , such as were used of old in Moria , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves : 
  BALIN SON OF FUNDIN LORD OF Moria . ’ 
  ‘ SON is dead then , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I feared FUNDIN was so . ’ Gimli cast Frodo hood over Frodo face . 
  Chapter 5 
  THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD - DÛM 
  The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin . Frodo thought of Bilbo and Balin long friendship with the dwarf , and of Balin ’s visit to the Shire long ago . In that dusty chamber in the mountains it seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world . 
  At length mountains stirred and looked up , and began to search for anything that would give mountains tidings of Balin ’s fate , or show what had become of world folk . There was another smaller door on the other side of the chamber , under the shaft . By both the doors mountains could now see that many bones were lying , and among mountains were broken swords and axe - heads , and cloven shields and helms . Some of the swords were crooked : orc - scimitars with blackened blades . 
  There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls , and in recesses were large iron - bound chests of wood . All had been broken and plundered ; but beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book . All had been slashed and stabbed and partly burned , and All was so stained with black and other dark marks like old blood that little of All could be read . Gandalf lifted All carefully , but the leaves cracked and broke as Gandalf laid All on the slab . Gandalf pored over All for some time without speaking . Frodo and Gimli standing at Frodo side could see , as Frodo gingerly turned the leaves , that leaves were written by many different hands , in runes , both of Moria and of Dale , and here and there in Elvish script . 
  At last Gandalf looked up . ‘ It seems to be a record of the fortunes of Balin ’s folk , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ I guess that Balin began with fortunes coming to Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago : the pages seem to have numbers referring to the years after pages arrival . The top page is marked one – three , so at least two are missing from the beginning . Listen to this ! 
  ‘ We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard – I think ; the next word is blurred and burned : probably room – we slew many in the bright – I think – sun in the dale . Floi was killed by an arrow . Dale slew the great . Then there is a blur followed by Floi under grass near Mirror mere . The next line or two I can not read . Then comes We have taken the twentyfirst hall of North end to dwell in . There is I can not read what . A shaft is mentioned . Then Balin has set up Balin seat in the Chamber of Mazarbul . ’ 
  ‘ The Chamber of Records , ’ said Gimli . ‘ I guess that is where we now stand . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I can read no more for a long way , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ except the word gold , and Durin ’s Axe and something helm . Then Balin is now lord of Moria . That seems to end a chapter . After some stars another hand begins , and I can see we found truesilver , and later the word wellforged , and then something , I have word ! mithril ; and the last two lines Óin to seek for the upper armouries of Third Deep , something go westwards , a blur , to Hollin gate . ’ 
  Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside . ‘ There are several pages of the same sort , rather hastily written and much damaged , ’ Gandalf said ; ‘ but I can make little of pages in this light . Now there must be a number of leaves missing , because pages begin to be numbered five , the fifth year of the colony , I suppose . Let me see ! No , pages are too cut and stained ; I can not read pages . We might do better in the sunlight . Wait ! Here is something : a large bold hand using an Elvish script . ’ 
  ‘ That would be Ori ’s hand , ’ said Gimli , looking over the wizard ’s arm . ‘ Ori could write well and speedily , and often used the Elvish characters . ’ 
  ‘ I fear Ori had ill tidings to record in a fair hand , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The first clear word is sorrow , but the rest of the line is lost , unless word ends in estre . Yes , it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth of novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale . Dale went alone to look in Mirror mere . an orc shot Dale from behind a stone . we slew the orc , but many more … up from east up the Silverlode . The remainder of the page is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out , but I think I can read we have barred the gates , and then can hold gates long if and then perhaps horrible and suffer . Poor Balin ! Balin seems to have kept the title that Balin took for less than five years . I wonder what happened afterwards ; but there is no time to puzzle out the last few pages . Here is the last page of all . ’ Balin paused and sighed . 
  ‘ page is grim reading , ’ Balin said . ‘ I fear all end was cruel . Listen ! We can not get out . We can not get out . all have taken the Bridge and second hall . Frár and Lóni and Náli fell there . Then there are four lines smeared so that I can only read went 5 days ago . The last lines run the pool is up to the wall at Westgate . The Watcher in the Water took Óin . We can not get out . The end comes , and then drums , drums in the deep . I wonder what that means . The last thing written is in a trailing scrawl of elf - letters : letters are coming . There is nothing more . ’ Gandalf paused and stood in silent thought . 
  A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Company . ‘ We can not get out , ’ muttered Gimli . ‘ It was well for us that the pool had sunk a little , and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end . ’ 
  Gandalf raised Gimli head and looked round . ‘ end seem to have made a last stand by both doors , ’ Gimli said ; ‘ but there were not many left by that time . So ended the attempt to retake Moria ! attempt was valiant but foolish . The time is not come yet . Now , I fear , we must say farewell to Balin son of Fundin . Here Fundin must lie in the halls of Fundin fathers . We will take this book , the Book of Mazarbul , and look at book more closely later . You had better keep book , Gimli , and take book back to Dáin , if you get a chance . book will interest Fundin , though book will grieve Fundin deeply . Come , let us go ! The morning is passing . ’ 
  ‘ Which way shall we go ? ’ asked Boromir . 
  ‘ Back to the hall , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ But our visit to this room has not been in vain . I now know where we are . This must be , as Gimli says , the Chamber of Mazarbul ; and the hall must be the twenty - first of the North - end . Therefore we should leave by the eastern arch of the hall , and bear right and south , and go downwards . The Twenty - first Hall should be on the Seventh Level , that is six above the level of the Gates . Come now ! Back to the hall ! ’ 
  Gandalf had hardly spoken these words , when there came a great noise : a rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths far below , and to tremble in the stone at words feet . words sprang towards the door in alarm . Doom , doom Doom rolled again , as if huge hands were turning the very caverns of Moria into a vast drum . Then there came an echoing blast : a great horn was blown in the hall , and answering horns and harsh cries were heard further off . There was a hurrying sound of many feet . 
  ‘ feet are coming ! ’ cried Legolas . 
  ‘ We can not get out , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Trapped ! ’ cried Gandalf . ‘ Why did I delay ? Here we are , caught , just as feet were before . But I was not here then . We will see what — ’ 
  Doom , doom came the drum - beat and the walls shook . 
  ‘ Slam the doors and wedge doors ! ’ shouted Aragorn . ‘ And keep your packs on as long as you can : we may get a chance to cut our way out yet . ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We must not get shut in . Keep the east door ajar ! We will go that way , if we get a chance . ’ 
  Another harsh horn - call and shrill cries rang out . Feet were coming down the corridor . There was a ring and clatter as the Company drew Feet swords . Glamdring shone with a pale light , and Sting glinted at the edges . Boromir set Sting shoulder against the western door . 
  ‘ Wait a moment ! Do not close moment yet ! ’ said Gandalf . Gandalf sprang forward to Boromir ’s side and drew Gandalf up to Gandalf full height . 
  ‘ Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria ? ’ Gandalf cried in a loud voice . 
  There was a rush of hoarse laughter , like the fall of sliding stones into a pit ; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command . Doom , boom , doom went the drums in the deep . 
  With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the narrow opening of the door and thrust forward Gandalf staff . There was a dazzling flash that lit the chamber and the passage outside . For an instant the wizard looked out . Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as wizard sprang back . 
  ‘ There are Orcs , very many of Orcs , ’ wizard said . ‘ And some are large and evil : black Uruks of Mordor . For the moment Uruks are hanging back , but there is something else there . A great cave - troll , I think , or more than one . There is no hope of escape that way . ’ 
  ‘ And no hope at all , if Uruks come at the other door as well , ’ said Boromir . 
  ‘ There is no sound outside here yet , ’ said Aragorn , who was standing by the eastern door listening . ‘ The passage on this side plunges straight down a stair : passage plainly does not lead back towards the hall . But passage is no good flying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind . We can not block the door . door key is gone and the lock is broken , and door opens inwards . We must do something to delay the enemy first . We will make enemy fear the Chamber of Mazarbul ! ’ Chamber said grimly , feeling the edge of Mazarbul sword , Andúril . 
  Heavy feet were heard in the corridor . Boromir flung Boromir against the door and heaved door to ; then Andúril wedged door with broken sword - blades and splinters of wood . The Company retreated to the other side of the chamber . But feet had no chance to fly yet . There was a blow on the door that made it quiver ; and then blow began to grind slowly open , driving back the wedges . A huge arm and shoulder , with a dark skin of greenish scales , was thrust through the widening gap . Then a great , flat , toeless foot was forced through below . There was a dead silence outside . 
  Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all Boromir might ; but foot sword rang , glanced aside , and fell from foot shaken hand . The blade was notched . 
  Suddenly , and to blade own surprise , Frodo felt a hot wrath blaze up in Frodo heart . ‘ The Shire ! ’ Frodo cried , and springing beside Boromir , Frodo stooped , and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot . There was a bellow , and the foot jerked back , nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo ’s arm . Black drops dripped from the blade and smoked on the floor . Boromir hurled Boromir against the door and slammed door again . 
  ‘ One for the Shire ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ The hobbit ’s bite is deep ! You have a good blade , Frodo son of Drogo ! ’ 
  There was a crash on the door , followed by crash after crash . Rams and hammers were beating against crash . crash cracked and staggered back , and the opening grew suddenly wide . Arrows came whistling in , but struck the northern wall , and fell harmlessly to the floor . There was a horn - blast and a rush of feet , and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber . 
  How many there were the Company could not count . The affray was sharp , but the orcs were dismayed by the fierceness of the defence . Legolas shot two through the throat . Gimli hewed the legs from under another that had sprung up on Balin ’s tomb . Boromir and Aragorn slew many . When thirteen had fallen the rest fled shrieking , leaving the defenders unharmed , except for Sam who had a scratch along the scalp . A quick duck had saved Sam ; and Sam had felled Sam orc : a sturdy thrust with Sam Barrow - blade . A fire was smouldering in Sam brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman step backwards , if Sam had seen fire . 
  ‘ Now is the time ! ’ cried Gandalf . ‘ Let us go , before the troll returns ! ’ 
  But even as followers retreated , and before Pippin and Merry had reached the stair outside , a huge orc - chieftain , almost man - high , clad in black mail from head to foot , leaped into the chamber ; behind Pippin Pippin followers clustered in the doorway . Pippin broad flat face was swart , Pippin eyes were like coals , and Pippin tongue was red ; Pippin wielded a great spear . With a thrust of Pippin huge hide shield Pippin turned Boromir ’s sword and bore Boromir backwards , throwing Boromir to the ground . Diving under Aragorn ’s blow with the speed of a striking snake Aragorn charged into the Company and thrust with Aragorn spear straight at Frodo . The blow caught Aragorn on the right side , and Frodo was hurled against the wall and pinned . Sam , with a cry , hacked at the spear - shaft , and cry broke . But even as the orc flung down the truncheon and swept out Sam scimitar , Andúril came down upon Sam helm . There was a flash like flame and the helm burst asunder . The orc fell with cloven head . Sam followers fled howling , as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at followers . 
  Doom , doom went the drums in the deep . The great voice rolled out again . 
  ‘ Now ! ’ shouted Gandalf . ‘ Now is the last chance . Run for chance ! ’ 
  Aragorn picked up Frodo where Frodo lay by the wall and made for the stair , pushing Merry and Pippin in front of Pippin . The others followed ; but Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas : in spite of the peril Gimli lingered by Balin ’s tomb with Gimli head bowed . Boromir hauled the eastern door to , grinding upon door hinges : door had great iron rings on either side , but could not be fastened . 
  ‘ I am all right , ’ gasped Frodo . ‘ I can walk . Put me down ! ’ 
  Aragorn nearly dropped Boromir in Boromir amazement . ‘ I thought you were dead ! ’ Boromir cried . 
  ‘ Not yet ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But there is no time for wonder . Off you go , all of you , down the stairs ! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom , but if I do not come soon , go on ! Go quickly and choose paths leading right and downwards . ’ 
  ‘ We can not leave you to hold the door alone ! ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Do as I say ! ’ said Gandalf fiercely . ‘ Swords are no more use here . Go ! ’ 
  The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark . Swords groped Swords way down a long flight of steps , and then looked back ; but Swords could see nothing , except high above steps the faint glimmer of the wizard ’s staff . wizard seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed door . Frodo breathed heavily and leaned against Sam , who put Sam arms about Sam . arms stood peering up the stairs into the darkness . Frodo thought Sam could hear the voice of Gandalf above , muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with a sighing echo . Sam could not catch what was said . The walls seemed to be trembling . Every now and again the drum - beats throbbed and rolled : doom , doom . 
  Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white light . Then there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud . The drum - beats broke out wildly : doom - boom , doom - boom , and then stopped . Gandalf came flying down the steps and fell to the ground in the midst of the Company . 
  ‘ Well , well ! That ’s over ! ’ said the wizard struggling to wizard feet . ‘ I have done all that I could . But I have met my match , and have nearly been destroyed . But do n’t stand here ! Go on ! You will have to do without light for a while : I am rather shaken . Go on ! Go on ! Where are you , Gimli ? Come ahead with me ! Keep close behind , all of you ! ’ 
  all stumbled after him wondering what had happened . Doom , doom went the drum - beats again : all now sounded muffled and far away , but all were following . There was no other sound of pursuit , neither tramp of feet , nor any voice . Gandalf took no turns , right or left , for the passage seemed to be going in the direction that Gandalf desired . Every now and again passage descended a flight of steps , fifty or more , to a lower level . At the moment that was steps chief danger ; for in the dark steps could not see a descent , until steps came on descent and put steps feet out into emptiness . Gandalf felt the ground with Gandalf staff like a blind man . 
  At the end of an hour steps had gone a mile , or maybe a little more , and had descended many flights of stairs . There was still no sound of pursuit . Almost steps began to hope that steps would escape . At the bottom of the seventh flight Gandalf halted . 
  ‘ Gandalf is getting hot ! ’ end gasped . ‘ We ought to be down at least to the level of the Gates now . Soon I think we should look for a left - hand turn to take us east . I hope turn is not far . I am very weary . I must rest here a moment , even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us . ’ 
  Gimli took Gimli arm and helped Gates down to a seat on the step . ‘ What happened away up there at the door ? ’ Gates asked . ‘ Did you meet the beater of the drums ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not know , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ But I found myself suddenly faced by something that I have not met before . I could think of nothing to do but to try and put a shutting - spell on the door . I know many ; but to do things of that kind rightly requires time , and even then the door can be broken by strength . 
  ‘ As I stood there I could hear orc - voices on the other side : at any moment I thought voices would burst moment open . I could not hear what was said ; voices seemed to be talking in voices own hideous language . All I caught was ghâsh : that is “ fire ” . Then something came into the chamber – I felt something through the door , and the orcs orcs were afraid and fell silent . something laid hold of the iron ring , and then something perceived me and my spell . 
  ‘ What something was I can not guess , but I have never felt such a challenge . The counter - spell was terrible . - nearly broke me . For an instant the door left my control and began to open ! I had to speak a word of Command . That proved too great a strain . The door burst in pieces . Something dark as a cloud was blocking out all the light inside , and I was thrown backwards down the stairs . All the wall gave way , and the roof of the chamber as well , I think . 
  ‘ I am afraid Balin is buried deep , and maybe something else is buried there too . I can not say . But at least the passage behind us was completely blocked . Ah ! I have never felt so spent , but passage is passing . And now what about you , Frodo ? There was not time to say so , but I have never been more delighted in my life than when you spoke . I feared that it was a brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying . ’ 
  ‘ What about me ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ I am alive , and whole I think . I am bruised and in pain , but whole is not too bad . ’ 
  ‘ Well , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ I can only say that hobbits are made of a stuff so tough that I have never met the like of Well . Had I known , I would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree ! That spear - thrust would have skewered a wild boar ! ’ 
  ‘ Well , thrust did not skewer me , I am glad to say , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ though I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil ’ Frodo said no more . Frodo found breathing painful . 
  ‘ You take after Bilbo , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ There is more about you than meets the eye , as I said of Bilbo long ago . ’ Frodo wondered if the remark meant more than remark said . 
  Frodo now went on again . Before long Gimli spoke . Gimli had keen eyes in the dark . ‘ I think , ’ Gimli said , ‘ that there is a light ahead . But light is not daylight . light is red . What can light be ? ’ 
  ‘ Ghâsh ! ’ muttered Gandalf . ‘ I wonder if that is what Gandalf meant : that the lower levels are on fire ? Still , we can only go on . ’ 
  Soon the light became unmistakable , and could be seen by all . light was flickering and glowing on the walls away down the passage before all . all could now see all way : in front the road sloped down swiftly , and some way ahead there stood a low archway ; through road the growing light came . The air became very hot . 
  When all came to the arch Gandalf went through , signing to all to wait . As Gandalf stood just beyond the opening all saw light face lit by a red glow . Quickly face stepped back . 
  ‘ There is some new devilry here , ’ face said , ‘ devised for our welcome , no doubt . But I know now where we are : we have reached the First Deep , the level immediately below the Gates . This is the Second Hall of Old Moria ; and the Gates are near : away beyond the eastern end , on the left , not more than a quarter of a mile . Across the Bridge , up a broad stair , along a wide road , through the First Hall , and out ! But come and look ! ’ 
  Hall peered out . Before Bridge was another cavernous hall . Hall was loftier and far longer than the one in which Gates had slept . Gates were near Hall eastern end ; westward hall ran away into darkness . Down the centre stalked a double line of towering pillars . Gates were carved like boles of mighty trees whose boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone . Gates stems were smooth and black , but a red glow was darkly mirrored in Gates sides . Right across the floor , close to the feet of two huge pillars a great fissure had opened . Out of fissure a fierce red light came , and now and again flames licked at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns . Wisps of dark smoke wavered in the hot air . 
  ‘ If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls , we should have been trapped here , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Let us hope that the fire now lies between us and pursuit . Come ! There is no time to lose . ’ 
  Even as Gandalf spoke Wisps heard again the pursuing drum - beat : Doom , doom , doom . Away beyond the shadows at the western end of the hall there came cries and horn - calls . Doom , doom : the pillars seemed to tremble and the flames to quiver . 
  ‘ Now for the last race ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ If the sun is shining outside , we may still escape . After me ! ’ 
  Gandalf turned left and sped across the smooth floor of the hall . The distance was greater than distance had looked . As beat ran beat heard the beat and echo of many hurrying feet behind . A shrill yell went up : beat had been seen . There was a ring and clash of steel . An arrow whistled over Frodo ’s head . 
  Boromir laughed . ‘ Boromir did not expect this , ’ Frodo said . ‘ The fire has cut beat off . We are on the wrong side ! ’ 
  ‘ Look ahead ! ’ called Gandalf . ‘ The Bridge is near . Bridge is dangerous and narrow . ’ 
  Suddenly Frodo saw before Gandalf a black chasm . At the end of the hall the floor vanished and fell to an unknown depth . The outer door could only be reached by a slender bridge of stone , without kerb or rail , that spanned the chasm with one curving spring of fifty feet . door was an ancient defence of the Dwarves against any enemy that might capture the First Hall and the outer passages . Dwarves could only pass across door in single file . At the brink Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind . 
  ‘ Lead the way , Gimli ! ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Pippin and Merry next . Straight on , and up the stair beyond the door ! ’ 
  Arrows fell among others . One struck Frodo and sprang back . Another pierced Gandalf ’s hat and stuck there like a black feather . Frodo looked behind . Beyond the fire Gandalf saw swarming black figures : there seemed to be hundreds of orcs . orcs brandished spears and scimitars which shone red as blood in the firelight . Doom , doom rolled the drum - beats , growing louder and louder , doom , doom . 
  Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string , though Legolas was a long shot for shot small bow . blood drew , but blood hand fell , and the arrow slipped to the ground . hand gave a cry of dismay and fear . Two great trolls appeared ; trolls bore great slabs of stone , and flung slabs down to serve as gangways over the fire . But it was not the trolls that had filled the Elf with terror . The ranks of the orcs had opened , and ranks crowded away , as if ranks ranks were afraid . Something was coming up behind ranks . What Something was could not be seen : it was like a great shadow , in the middle of which was a dark form , of man - shape maybe , yet greater ; and a power and terror seemed to be in middle and to go before middle . 
  middle came to the edge of the fire and the light faded as if a cloud had bent over middle . Then with a rush middle leaped across the fissure . The flames roared up to greet middle , and wreathed about middle ; and a black smoke swirled in the air . middle streaming mane kindled , and blazed behind middle . In middle right hand was a blade like a stabbing tongue of fire ; in middle left middle held a whip of many thongs . 
  ‘ Ai ! ai ! ’ wailed Legolas . ‘ A Balrog ! A Balrog is come ! ’ 
  Gimli stared with wide eyes . ‘ Durin ’s Bane ! ’ Durin cried , and letting Balrog axe fall Balrog covered Balrog face . 
  ‘ A Balrog , ’ muttered Gandalf . ‘ Now I understand . ’ Balrog faltered and leaned heavily on Balrog staff . ‘ What an evil fortune ! And I am already weary . ’ 
  The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards Balrog . The orcs yelled and poured over the stone gangways . Then Boromir raised Balrog horn and blew . Loud the challenge rang and bellowed , like the shout of many throats under the cavernous roof . For a moment the orcs quailed and the fiery shadow halted . Then the echoes died as suddenly as a flame blown out by a dark wind , and the enemy advanced again . 
  ‘ Over the bridge ! ’ cried Gandalf , recalling Gandalf strength . ‘ Fly ! This is a foe beyond any of you . I must hold the narrow way . Fly ! ’ Aragorn and Boromir did not heed the command , but still held Aragorn ground , side by side , behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge . The others halted just within the doorway at the hall ’s end , and turned , unable to leave others leader to face the enemy alone . 
  The Balrog reached the bridge . Gandalf stood in the middle of the span , leaning on the staff in Balrog left hand , but in Balrog other hand Glamdring gleamed , cold and white . Balrog enemy halted again , facing Balrog , and the shadow about enemy reached out like two vast wings . enemy raised the whip , and the thongs whined and cracked . Fire came from Fire nostrils . But Gandalf stood firm . 
  ‘ You can not pass , ’ Gandalf said . The orcs stood still , and a dead silence fell . ‘ I am a servant of the Secret Fire , wielder of the flame of Anor . You can not pass . The dark fire will not avail you , flame of Udûn . Go back to the Shadow ! You can not pass . ’ 
  The Balrog made no answer . The fire in answer seemed to die , but the darkness grew . fire stepped forward slowly on to the bridge , and suddenly fire drew bridge up to a great height , and bridge wings were spread from wall to wall ; but still Gandalf could be seen , glimmering in the gloom ; Gandalf seemed small , and altogether alone : grey and bent , like a wizened tree before the onset of a storm . 
  From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming . 
  Glamdring glittered white in answer . 
  There was a ringing clash and a stab of white fire . The Balrog fell back , and Glamdring sword flew up in molten fragments . The wizard swayed on the bridge , stepped back a pace , and then again stood still . 
  ‘ You can not pass ! ’ wizard said . 
  With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge . bridge whip whirled and hissed . 
  ‘ wizard can not stand alone ! ’ cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the bridge . ‘ Elendil ! ’ Aragorn shouted . ‘ I am with you , Gandalf ! ’ 
  ‘ Gondor ! ’ cried Boromir and leaped after Boromir . 
  At that moment Gandalf lifted Boromir staff , and crying aloud Boromir smote the bridge before Aragorn . The staff broke asunder and fell from Aragorn hand . A blinding sheet of white flame sprang up . The bridge cracked . Right at the Balrog ’s feet bridge broke , and the stone upon which bridge stood crashed into the gulf , while the rest remained , poised , quivering like a tongue of rock thrust out into emptiness . 
  With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward , and cry shadow plunged down and vanished . But even as cry fell cry swung cry whip , and the thongs lashed and curled about the wizard ’s knees , dragging wizard to the brink . wizard staggered and fell , grasped vainly at the stone , and slid into the abyss . ‘ Fly , you fools ! ’ wizard cried , and was gone . 
  The fires went out , and blank darkness fell . The Company stood rooted with horror staring into the pit . Even as Aragorn and Boromir came flying back , the rest of the bridge cracked and fell . With a cry Aragorn roused fires . 
  ‘ Come ! I will lead you now ! ’ Come called . ‘ We must obey Boromir last command . Follow me ! ’ 
  fires stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door , Aragorn leading , Boromir at the rear . At the top was a wide echoing passage . Along this fires fled . Frodo heard Sam at Sam side weeping , and then Sam found that Sam Sam was weeping as Sam ran . Doom , doom , doom the drum - beats rolled behind , mournful now and slow ; doom ! 
  beats ran on . The light grew before beats ; great shafts pierced the roof . beats ran swifter . beats passed into a hall , bright with daylight from roof high windows in the east . beats fled across roof . Through roof huge broken doors beats passed , and suddenly before beats the Great Gates opened , an arch of blazing light . 
  There was a guard of orcs crouching in the shadows behind the great door - posts towering on either side , but the gates were shattered and cast down . Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that stood in captain path , and the rest fled in terror of captain wrath . The Company swept past terror and took no heed of terror . Out of the Gates terror ran and sprang down the huge and age - worn steps , the threshold of Moria . 
  Thus , at last , terror came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind on terror faces . 
  terror did not halt until terror were out of bowshot from the walls . Dimrill Dale lay about terror . The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay upon bowshot , but eastwards there was a golden light on the land . bowshot was but one hour after noon . The sun was shining ; the clouds were white and high . 
  clouds looked back . Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under the mountain - shadow . Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow drum - beats : doom . A thin black smoke trailed out . Nothing else was to be seen ; the dale all around was empty . Doom . Grief at last wholly overcame beats , and beats wept long : some standing and silent , some cast upon the ground . Doom , doom . The drum - beats faded . 
  Chapter 6 
  LOTHLÓRIEN 
  ‘ Alas ! I fear we can not stay here longer , ’ said Aragorn . Aragorn looked towards the mountains and held up Aragorn sword . ‘ Farewell , Gandalf ! ’ Aragorn cried . ‘ Did I not say to you : if you pass the doors of Moria , beware ? Alas that I spoke true ! What hope have we without you ? ’ 
  Aragorn turned to the Company . ‘ We must do without hope , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ At least we may yet be avenged . Let us gird ourselves and weep no more ! Come ! We have a long road , and much to do . ’ 
  no rose and looked about Company . Northward the dale ran up into a glen of shadows between two great arms of the mountains , above which three white peaks were shining : Celebdil , Fanuidhol , Caradhras , the Mountains of Moria . At the head of the glen a torrent flowed like a white lace over an endless ladder of short falls , and a mist of foam hung in the air about the mountains ’ feet . 
  ‘ Yonder is the Dimrill Stair , ’ said Aragorn , pointing to the falls . ‘ Down the deep - cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should have come , if fortune had been kinder . ’ 
  ‘ Or Caradhras less cruel , ’ said Gimli . ‘ There Caradhras stands smiling in the sun ! ’ Gimli shook Gimli fist at the furthest of the snow - capped peaks and turned away . 
  To the east the outflung arm of the mountains marched to a sudden end , and far lands could be descried beyond mountains , wide and vague . To the south the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach . Less than a mile away , and a little below Mountains , for Mountains still stood high up on the west side of the dale , there lay a mere . It was long and oval , shaped like a great spear - head thrust deep into the northern glen ; but glen southern end was beyond the shadows under the sunlit sky . Yet glen waters were dark : a deep blue like clear evening sky seen from a lamp - lit room . glen face was still and unruffled . About glen lay a smooth sward , shelving down on all sides to glen bare unbroken rim . 
  ‘ There lies the Mirrormere , deep Kheled - zâram ! ’ said Gimli sadly . ‘ I remember that Mirrormere said : “ May you have joy of the sight ! But we can not linger there . ” Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again . It is I that must hasten away , and Mirrormere that must remain . ’ 
  The Company now went down the road from the Gates . It was rough and broken , fading to a winding track between heather and whin that thrust amid the cracking stones . But still it could be seen that once long ago a great paved way had wound upwards from the lowlands to the Dwarf - kingdom . In places there were ruined works of stone beside the path , and mounds of green topped with slender birches , or fir - trees sighing in the wind . An eastward bend led mounds hard by the sward of Mirrormere , and there not far from the roadside stood a single column broken at the top . 
  ‘ That is Durin ’s Stone ! ’ cried Gimli . ‘ I can not pass without turning aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale ! ’ 
  ‘ Be swift then ! ’ said Aragorn , looking back towards the Gates . ‘ The Sun sinks early . The Orcs will not , maybe , come out till after dusk , but we must be far away before nightfall . The Moon is almost spent , and Orcs will be dark tonight . ’ 
  ‘ Come with me , Frodo ! ’ cried the dwarf , springing from the road . ‘ I would not have you go without seeing Kheled - zâram . ’ dwarf ran down the long green slope . Frodo followed slowly , drawn by the still blue water in spite of hurt and weariness ; Sam came up behind . 
  Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up . Gimli was cracked and weather - worn , and the faint runes upon Gimli side could not be read . ‘ This pillar marks the spot where Durin first looked in the Mirrormere , ’ said the dwarf . ‘ Let us look ourselves once , ere we go ! ’ 
  dwarf stooped over the dark water . At first dwarf could see nothing . Then slowly dwarf saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profound blue , and the peaks were like plumes of white flame above dwarf ; beyond there was a space of sky . There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glinting stars , though sunlight was in the sky above . Of stars own stooping forms no shadow could be seen . 
  ‘ O Kheled - zâram fair and wonderful ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ There lies the Crown of Durin till Crown wakes . Farewell ! ’ Gimli bowed , and turned away , and hastened back up the greensward to the road again . 
  ‘ What did you see ? ’ said Pippin to Sam , but Sam was too deep in thought to answer . 
  The road now turned south and went quickly downwards , running out from between the arms of the dale . Some way below the mere arms came on a deep well of water , clear as crystal , from which a freshet fell over a stone lip and ran glistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel . 
  ‘ Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Do not drink of Silverlode ! Silverlode is icy cold . ’ 
  ‘ Soon Silverlode becomes a swift river , and Silverlode gathers water from many other mountain - streams , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Our road leads beside Silverlode for many miles . For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose , and first I hope to come to the woods where the Silverlode flows into the Great River – out yonder . ’ Gandalf looked as Aragorn pointed , and before woods River could see the stream leaping down to the trough of the valley , and then running on and away into the lower lands , until stream was lost in a golden haze . 
  ‘ There lie the woods of Lothlórien ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ That is the fairest of all the dwellings of my people . There are no trees like the trees of that land . For in the autumn trees leaves fall not , but turn to gold . Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do trees fall , and then the boughs are laden with yellow flowers ; and the floor of the wood is golden , and golden is the roof , and floor pillars are of silver , for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey . So still our songs in Mirkwood say . My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood , and heart were springtime ! ’ 
  ‘ My heart will be glad , even in the winter , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But heart lies many miles away . Let us hasten ! ’ 
  For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the others ; but Aragorn was leading Frodo at a great pace , and after a while Frodo lagged behind . Frodo had eaten nothing since the early morning . Sam ’s cut was burning like fire , and Sam head felt light . In spite of the shining sun the wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria . Sam shivered . Frodo felt every step more painful and Sam gasped for breath . 
  At last Legolas turned , and seeing Frodo now far behind , Sam spoke to Aragorn . The others halted , and Aragorn ran back , calling to Boromir to come with Aragorn . 
  ‘ I am sorry , Frodo ! ’ Aragorn cried , full of concern . ‘ So much has happened this day and we have such need of haste , that I have forgotten that you were hurt ; and Sam too . You should have spoken . We have done nothing to ease you , as we ought , though all the orcs of Moria were after us . Come now ! A little further on there is a place where we can rest for a little . There I will do what I can for you . Come , Boromir ! We will carry orcs . ’ 
  Soon afterwards orcs came upon another stream that ran down from the west , and joined stream bubbling water with the hurrying Silverlode . Together orcs plunged over a fall of green - hued stone , and foamed down into a dell . About stream stood fir - trees , short and bent , and stream sides were steep and clothed with harts - tongue and shrubs of whortle - berry . At the bottom there was a level space through which the stream flowed noisily over shining pebbles . Here pebbles rested . stream was now nearly three hours after noon , and pebbles had come only a few miles from the Gates . Already the sun was westering . 
  While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of brush- and fir - wood , and drew water , Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo . Sam ’s wound was not deep , but wound looked ugly , and Aragorn ’s face was grave as Aragorn examined wound . After a moment Aragorn looked up with relief . 
  ‘ Good luck , Sam ! ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Many have received worse than this in payment for the slaying of relief first orc . The cut is not poisoned , as the wounds of orc - blades too often are . cut should heal well when I have tended cut . Bathe cut when Gimli has heated water . ’ 
  Aragorn opened Aragorn pouch and drew out some withered leaves . ‘ wounds are dry , and some of wounds virtue has gone , ’ Aragorn said , ‘ but here I have still some of the leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weathertop . Crush one in the water , and wash the wound clean , and I will bind wound . Now water is your turn , Frodo ! ’ 
  ‘ I am all right , ’ said Frodo , reluctant to have Aragorn garments touched . ‘ All I needed was some food and a little rest . ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We must have a look and see what the hammer and the anvil have done to you . I still marvel that you are alive at all . ’ Gently Aragorn stripped off Frodo ’s old jacket and worn tunic , and gave a gasp of wonder . Then Aragorn laughed . The silver corslet shimmered before Aragorn eyes like the light upon a rippling sea . Carefully Aragorn took it off and held corslet up , and the gems on corslet glittered like stars , and the sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in a pool . 
  ‘ Look , my friends ! ’ Aragorn called . ‘ Here ’s a pretty hobbit - skin to wrap an elven - princeling in ! If it were known that hobbits had such hides , all the hunters of Middle - earth would be riding to the Shire . ’ 
  ‘ And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain , ’ said Gimli , gazing at the mail in wonder . ‘ Shire is a mithril - coat . Mithril ! I have never seen or heard tell of one so fair . Is this the coat that Gandalf spoke of ? Then world undervalued Gandalf . But Gandalf was well given ! ’ 
  ‘ I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing , so close in Bilbo little room , ’ said Merry . ‘ Bless the old hobbit ! I love Bilbo more than ever . I hope we get a chance of telling Bilbo about chance ! ’ 
  There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo ’s right side and breast . Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather , but at one point the rings had been driven through mail into the flesh . Frodo ’s left side also was scored and bruised where Frodo had been hurled against the wall . While the others set the food ready , Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas was steeped . The pungent fragrance filled the dell , and all those who stooped over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened . Soon Frodo felt the pain leave Aragorn , and Aragorn breath grew easy : though Aragorn was stiff and sore to the touch for many days . Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at Aragorn side . 
  ‘ The mail is marvellously light , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Put mail on again , if you can bear mail . My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat . Do not lay mail aside , even in sleep , unless fortune brings you where you are safe for a while ; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts . ’ 
  When pads had eaten , the Company got ready to go on . pads put out the fire and hid all traces of fire . Then climbing out of the dell pads took to the road again . pads had not gone far before the sun sank behind the westward heights and great shadows crept down the mountain - sides . Dusk veiled pads feet , and mist rose in the hollows . Away in the east the evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood . Sam and Frodo now feeling eased and greatly refreshed were able to go at a fair pace , and with only one brief halt Aragorn led the Company on for nearly three more hours . 
  Company was dark . Deep night had fallen . There were many clear stars , but the fast - waning moon would not be seen till late . Gimli and Frodo were at the rear , walking softly and not speaking , listening for any sound upon the road behind . At length Gimli broke the silence . 
  ‘ Not a sound but the wind , ’ Gimli said . ‘ There are no goblins near , or my ears are made of wood . It is to be hoped that the Orcs will be content with driving us from Moria . And maybe that was all all purpose , and all had nothing else to do with us – with the Ring . Though Orcs will often pursue foes for many leagues into the plain , if foes have a fallen captain to avenge . ’ 
  Frodo did not answer . Frodo looked at Sting , and the blade was dull . Yet Sting had heard something , or thought Sting had . As soon as the shadows had fallen about feet and the road behind was dim , Sting had heard again the quick patter of feet . Even now Sting heard road . Sting turned swiftly . There were two tiny gleams of light behind , or for a moment Sting thought Sting saw feet , but at once feet slipped aside and vanished . 
  ‘ What is road ? ’ said the dwarf . 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ I thought I heard feet , and I thought I saw a light – like eyes . I have thought so often , since we first entered Moria . ’ 
  Gimli halted and stooped to the ground . ‘ I hear nothing but the night - speech of plant and stone , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Come ! Let us hurry ! The others are out of sight . ’ 
  The night - wind blew chill up the valley to meet others . Before others a wide grey shadow loomed , and others heard an endless rustle of leaves like poplars in the breeze . 
  ‘ Lothlórien ! ’ cried Legolas . ‘ Lothlórien ! We have come to the eaves of the Golden Wood . Alas that Lothlórien is winter ! ’ 
  Under the night the trees stood tall before others , arched over the road and stream that ran suddenly beneath others spreading boughs . In the dim light of the stars others stems were grey , and others quivering leaves a hint of fallow gold . 
  ‘ Lothlórien ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Glad I am to hear again the wind in the trees ! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates , but we can go no further . Here let us hope that the virtue of the Elves will keep us tonight from the peril that comes behind . ’ 
  ‘ If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land whence we wandered in ages long ago , ’ said Legolas , ‘ but we hear that Lórien is not yet deserted , for there is a secret power here that holds evil from the land . Nevertheless land folk are seldom seen , and maybe Elves dwell now deep in the woods and far from the northern border . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed deep in the wood Elves dwell , ’ said Aragorn , and sighed as if some memory stirred in Aragorn . ‘ We must fend for ourselves tonight . We will go forward a short way , until the trees are all about us , and then we will turn aside from the path and seek a place to rest in . ’ 
  Aragorn stepped forward ; but Boromir stood irresolute and did not follow . ‘ Is there no other way ? ’ Aragorn said . 
  ‘ What other fairer way would you desire ? ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ A plain road , though road led through a hedge of swords , ’ said Boromir . ‘ By strange paths has this Company been led , and so far to evil fortune . Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria , to our loss . And now we must enter the Golden Wood , you say . But of that perilous land we have heard in Gondor , and it is said that few come out who once go in ; and of that few none have escaped unscathed . ’ 
  ‘ Say not unscathed , but if you say unchanged , then maybe you will speak the truth , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But lore wanes in Gondor , Boromir , if in the city of those who once were wise shades now speak evil of Lothlórien . Believe what you will , there is no other way for us – unless you would go back to Moria - gate , or scale the pathless mountains , or swim the Great River all alone . ’ 
  ‘ Then lead on ! ’ said Boromir . ‘ But way is perilous . ’ 
  ‘ Perilous indeed , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ fair and perilous ; but only evil need fear way , or those who bring some evil with those . Follow me ! ’ 
  those had gone little more than a mile into the forest when those came upon another stream flowing down swiftly from the tree - clad slopes that climbed back westward towards the mountains . those heard stream splashing over a fall away among the shadows on those right . stream dark hurrying waters ran across the path before those , and joined the Silverlode in a swirl of dim pools among the roots of trees . 
  ‘ Here is Nimrodel ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ Of this stream the Silvan Elves made many songs long ago , and still we sing Elves in the North , remembering the rainbow on North falls , and the golden flowers that floated in North foam . All is dark now and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down . I will bathe my feet , for it is said that the water is healing to the weary . ’ Bridge went forward and climbed down the deep - cloven bank and stepped into the stream . 
  ‘ Follow me ! ’ Bridge cried . ‘ The water is not deep . Let us wade across ! On the further bank we can rest , and the sound of the falling water may bring us sleep and forgetfulness of grief . ’ 
  One by one one climbed down and followed Legolas . For a moment Frodo stood near the brink and let the water flow over Frodo tired feet . It was cold but water touch was clean , and as Legolas went on and water mounted to Legolas knees , Legolas felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from Legolas limbs . 
  When all the Company had crossed , limbs sat and rested and ate a little food ; and Legolas told limbs tales of Lothlórien that the Elves of Mirkwood still kept in limbs hearts , of sunlight and starlight upon the meadows by the Great River before the world was grey . 
  At length a silence fell , and limbs heard the music of the waterfall running sweetly in the shadows . Almost Frodo fancied that Frodo could hear a voice singing , mingled with the sound of the water . 
  ‘ Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel ? ’ asked Legolas . ‘ I will sing you a song of the maiden Nimrodel , who bore the same name as the stream beside which Nimrodel lived long ago . It is a fair song in our woodland tongue ; but this is how this runs in the Westron Speech , as some in Rivendell now sing this . ’ In a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above voice Legolas began : 
  An Elven - maid there was of old , 
  A shining star by day : 
  maid mantle white was hemmed with gold , 
  maid shoes of silver - grey . 
  A star was bound upon maid brows , 
  A light was on maid hair 
  As sun upon the golden boughs 
  In Lórien the fair . 
  maid hair was long , maid limbs were white , 
  And fair maid was and free ; 
  And in the wind maid went as light 
  As leaf of linden - tree . 
  Beside the falls of Nimrodel , 
  By water clear and cool , 
  maid voice as falling silver fell 
  Into the shining pool . 
  Where now maid wanders none can tell , 
  In sunlight or in shade ; 
  For lost of yore was Nimrodel 
  And in the mountains strayed . 
  The elven - ship in haven grey 
  Beneath the mountain - lee 
  Awaited maid for many a day 
  Beside the roaring sea . 
  A wind by night in Northern lands 
  Arose , and loud Arose cried , 
  And drove the ship from elven - strands 
  Across the streaming tide . 
  When dawn came dim the land was lost , 
  The mountains sinking grey 
  Beyond the heaving waves that tossed 
  mountains plumes of blinding spray . 
  Amroth beheld the fading shore 
  Now low beyond the swell , 
  And cursed the faithless ship that bore 
  grey far from Nimrodel . 
  Of old grey was an Elven - king , 
  A lord of tree and glen , 
  When golden were the boughs in spring 
  In fair Lothlórien . 
  From helm to sea boughs saw grey leap , 
  As arrow from the string , 
  And dive into the water deep , 
  As mew upon the wing . 
  The wind was in grey flowing hair , 
  The foam about grey shone ; 
  Afar boughs saw grey strong and fair 
  Go riding like a swan . 
  But from the West has come no word , 
  And on the Hither Shore 
  No tidings Elven - folk have heard 
  Of Amroth evermore . 
  The voice of Legolas faltered , and the song ceased . ‘ I can not sing any more , ’ grey said . ‘ That is but a part , for I have forgotten much . It is long and sad , for That tells how sorrow came upon Lothlórien , Lothlórien of the Blossom , when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains . ’ 
  ‘ But the Dwarves did not make the evil , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ I said not so ; yet evil came , ’ answered Legolas sadly . ‘ Then many of the Elves of Nimrodel ’s kindred left Dwarves dwellings and departed , and Nimrodel was lost far in the South , in the passes of the White Mountains ; and South came not to the ship where Amroth Legolas lover waited for lover . But in the spring when the wind is in the new leaves the echo of lover voice may still be heard by the falls that bear lover name . And when the wind is in the South the voice of Amroth comes up from the sea ; for Nimrodel flows into Silverlode , that Elves call Celebrant , and Celebrant into Anduin the Great , and Anduin flows into the Bay of Belfalas whence the Elves of Lórien set sail . But neither Nimrodel nor Amroth came ever back . 
  ‘ It is told that lover had a house built in the branches of a tree that grew near the falls ; for that was the custom of the Elves of Lórien , to dwell in the trees , and maybe Lórien is so still . Therefore Elves were called the Galadhrim , the Tree - people . Deep in Elves forest the trees are very great . The people of the woods did not delve in the ground like Dwarves , nor build strong places of stone before the Shadow came . ’ 
  ‘ And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be thought safer than sitting on the ground , ’ said Gimli . Gimli looked across the stream to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale , and then up into the roof of dark boughs above . 
  ‘ Your words bring good counsel , Gimli , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We can not build a house , but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek refuge in the tree - tops , if we can . We have sat here beside the road already longer than was wise . ’ 
  The Galadhrim now turned aside from the path , and went into the shadow of the deeper woods , westward along the mountain - stream away from Silverlode . Not far from the falls of Nimrodel woods found a cluster of trees , some of which overhung the stream . woods great grey trunks were of mighty girth , but woods height could not be guessed . 
  ‘ I will climb up , ’ said Legolas . ‘ I am at home among trees , by root or bough , though these trees are of a kind strange to me , save as a name in song . Mellyrn trees are called , and are those that bear the yellow blossom , but I have never climbed in one . I will see now what is trees shape and way of growth . ’ 
  ‘ Whatever way may be , ’ said Pippin , ‘ trees will be marvellous trees indeed if trees can offer any rest at night , except to birds . I can not sleep on a perch ! ’ 
  ‘ Then dig a hole in the ground , ’ said Legolas , ‘ if that is more after the fashion of your kind . But you must dig swift and deep , if you wish to hide from Orcs . ’ Pippin sprang lightly up from the ground and caught a branch that grew from the trunk high above Pippin head . But even as Pippin swung there for a moment , a voice spoke suddenly from the tree - shadows above Pippin . 
  ‘ Daro ! ’ voice said in commanding tone , and Legolas dropped back to earth in surprise and fear . Pippin shrank against the bole of the tree . 
  ‘ Stand still ! ’ Pippin whispered to the others . ‘ Do not move or speak ! ’ 
  There was a sound of soft laughter over others heads , and then another clear voice spoke in an elven - tongue . Frodo could understand little of what was said , for the speech that the Silvan folk east of the mountains used among Frodo was unlike that of the West . Legolas looked up and answered in the same language . * 
  ‘ Who are Legolas , and what do others say ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ others ’re Elves , ’ said Sam . ‘ Ca n’t you hear others voices ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , others are Elves , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ and others say that you breathe so loud that others could shoot you in the dark . ’ Sam hastily put Sam hand over Sam mouth . ‘ But others say also that you need have no fear . others have been aware of us for a long while . others heard my voice across the Nimrodel , and knew that I was one of others Northern kindred , and therefore others did not hinder our crossing ; and afterwards others heard my song . Now others bid me climb up with Frodo ; for others seem to have had some tidings of Frodo and of our journey . The others others ask to wait a little , and to keep watch at the foot of the tree , until others have decided what is to be done . ’ 
  Out of the shadows a ladder was let down : it was made of rope , silver - grey and glimmering in the dark , and though ladder looked slender ladder proved strong enough to bear many men . Legolas ran lightly up , and Frodo followed slowly ; behind came Sam trying not to breathe loudly . The branches of the mallorn - tree grew out nearly straight from the trunk , and then swept upward ; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown of many boughs , and among these branches found that there had been built a wooden platform , or flet as such things were called in those days : the Elves called platform a talan . platform was reached by a round hole in the centre through which the ladder passed . 
  When Frodo came at last up on to the flet Sam found Legolas seated with three other Elves . Elves were clad in shadowy - grey , and could not be seen among the tree - stems , unless Elves moved suddenly . Elves stood up , and one of Elves uncovered a small lamp that gave out a slender silver beam . Sam held lamp up , looking at Frodo ’s face , and Sam ’s . Then Sam shut off the light again , and spoke words of welcome in Sam elven - tongue . Frodo spoke haltingly in return . 
  ‘ Welcome ! ’ the Elf then said again in the Common Language , speaking slowly . ‘ We seldom use any tongue but our own ; for we dwell now in the heart of the forest , and do not willingly have dealings with any other folk . Even our own kindred in the North are sundered from us . But there are some of us still who go abroad for the gathering of news and the watching of our enemies , and enemies speak the languages of other lands . I am one . Haldir is my name . My brothers , Rúmil and Orophin , speak little of your tongue . 
  ‘ But we have heard rumours of your coming , for the messengers of Elrond passed by Lórien on messengers way home up the Dimrill Stair . We had not heard of – hobbits , of halflings , for many a long year , and did not know that any yet dwelt in Middle - earth . You do not look evil ! And since you come with an Elf of our kindred , we are willing to befriend you , as Elrond asked ; though it is not our custom to lead strangers through our land . But you must stay here tonight . How many are you ? ’ 
  ‘ Eight , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Myself , four hobbits ; and two men , one of whom , Aragorn , is an Elf - friend of the folk of Westernesse . ’ 
  ‘ The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lórien , ’ said Haldir , ‘ and friend has the favour of the Lady . All then is well . But you have yet spoken only of seven . ’ 
  ‘ The eighth is a dwarf , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ A dwarf ! ’ said Haldir . ‘ That is not well . We have not had dealings with the Dwarves since the Dark Days . dealings are not permitted in our land . I can not allow Haldir to pass . ’ 
  ‘ But dwarf is from the Lonely Mountain , one of Dáin ’s trusty people , and friendly to Elrond , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Elrond Elrond chose Frodo to be one of our companions , and Frodo has been brave and faithful . ’ 
  The Elves spoke together in soft voices , and questioned Legolas in Elves own tongue . ‘ Very good , ’ said Haldir at last . ‘ We will do this , though this is against our liking . If Aragorn and Legolas will guard Frodo , and answer for Frodo , Frodo shall pass ; but Frodo must go blindfold through Lothlórien . 
  ‘ But now we must debate no longer . Your folk must not remain on the ground . We have been keeping watch on the rivers , ever since we saw a great troop of Orcs going north towards Moria , along the skirts of the mountains , many days ago . Wolves are howling on the wood ’s borders . If you have indeed come from Moria , the peril can not be far behind . Tomorrow early you must go on . 
  ‘ The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us – we do not fear hobbits ! There is another talan in the next tree . There the others must take refuge . You , Legolas , must answer to us for others . Call us , if anything is amiss ! And have an eye on that dwarf ! ’ 
  Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir ’s message ; and soon afterwards Merry and Pippin clambered up on to the high flet . Merry were out of breath and seemed rather scared . 
  ‘ There ! ’ said Merry panting . ‘ We have lugged up your blankets as well as our own . Strider has hidden all the rest of our baggage in a deep drift of leaves . ’ 
  ‘ You had no need of your burdens , ’ said Haldir . ‘ It is cold in the tree - tops in winter , though the wind tonight is in the South ; but we have food and drink to give you that will drive away the night - chill , and we have skins and cloaks to spare . ’ 
  The hobbits accepted this second ( and far better ) supper very gladly . Then hobbits wrapped hobbits warmly , not only in the fur - cloaks of the Elves , but in hobbits own blankets as well , and tried to go to sleep . But weary as hobbits were only Sam found that easy to do . Hobbits do not like heights , and do not sleep upstairs , even when Hobbits have any stairs . The flet was not at all to Hobbits liking as a bedroom . flet had no walls , not even a rail ; only on one side was there a light plaited screen , which could be moved and fixed in different places according to the wind . 
  Pippin went on talking for a while . ‘ I hope , if I do go to sleep in this bird - loft , that I sha n’t roll off , ’ rail said . 
  ‘ Once I do get to sleep , ’ said Sam , ‘ I shall go on sleeping , whether I roll off or no . And the less said , the sooner I ’ll drop off , if you take my meaning . ’ 
  Frodo lay for some time awake , and looked up at the stars glinting through the pale roof of quivering leaves . Sam was snoring at Sam side long before Sam Sam closed Sam eyes . Sam could dimly see the grey forms of two elves sitting motionless with elves arms about elves knees , speaking in whispers . The other had gone down to take up Sam watch on one of the lower branches . At last lulled by the wind in the boughs above , and the sweet murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below , Frodo fell asleep with the song of Legolas running in Frodo mind . 
  Late in the night Frodo woke . The other hobbits were asleep . The Elves were gone . The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the leaves . The wind was still . A little way off Frodo heard a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on the ground below . There was a ring of metal . The sounds died slowly away , and seemed to go southward , on into the wood . 
  A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet . Frodo sat up in alarm and saw that Frodo was a grey - hooded Elf . head looked towards the hobbits . 
  ‘ What is Frodo ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Yrch ! ’ said the Elf in a hissing whisper , and cast on to the flet the rope - ladder rolled up . 
  ‘ Orcs ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ What are Orcs doing ? ’ But the Elf had gone . 
  There were no more sounds . Even the leaves were silent , and the very falls seemed to be hushed . Frodo sat and shivered in Frodo wraps . Elf was thankful that wraps had not been caught on the ground ; but Elf felt that the trees offered little protection , except concealment . Orcs were as keen as hounds on a scent , it was said , but hounds could also climb . Orcs drew out Sting : scent flashed and glittered like a blue flame ; and then slowly faded again and grew dull . In spite of the fading of Sting sword the feeling of immediate danger did not leave Frodo , rather feeling grew stronger . Sting got up and crawled to the opening and peered down . Sting was almost certain that Sting could hear stealthy movements at the tree ’s foot far below . 
  Not Elves ; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless in Elves movements . Then Sting heard faintly a sound like sniffing ; and something seemed to be scrabbling on the bark of the tree - trunk . Sting stared down into the dark , holding Sting breath . 
  Something was now climbing slowly , and Something breath came like a soft hissing through closed teeth . Then coming up , close to the stem , Frodo saw two pale eyes . eyes stopped and gazed upward unwinking . Suddenly eyes turned away , and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and vanished . 
  Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly up through the branches . ‘ There was something in this tree that I have never seen before , ’ Haldir said . ‘ something was not an orc . something fled as soon as I touched the tree - stem . It seemed to be wary , and to have some skill in trees , or I might have thought that something was one of you hobbits . 
  ‘ I did not shoot , for I dared not arouse any cries : we can not risk battle . A strong company of Orcs has passed . company crossed the Nimrodel – curse company foul feet in Nimrodel clean water ! – and went on down the old road beside the river . company seemed to pick up some scent , and company searched the ground for a while near the place where you halted . The three of us could not challenge a hundred , so we went ahead and spoke with feigned voices , leading voices on into the wood . 
  ‘ Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to warn our people . None of the Orcs will ever return out of Lórien . And there will be many Elves hidden on the northern border before another night falls . But you must take the road south as soon as road is fully light . ’ 
  Day came pale from the East . As the light grew it filtered through the yellow leaves of the mallorn , and it seemed to the hobbits that the early sun of a cool summer ’s morning was shining . Pale - blue sky peeped among the moving branches . Looking through an opening on the south side of the flet Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying like a sea of fallow gold tossing gently in the breeze . 
  The morning was still young and cold when the Company set out again , guided now by Haldir and Company brother Rúmil . ‘ Farewell , sweet Nimrodel ! ’ cried Legolas . Frodo looked back and caught a gleam of white foam among the grey tree - stems . ‘ Farewell , ’ Rúmil said . It seemed to Rúmil that Rúmil would never hear again a running water so beautiful , for ever blending water innumerable notes in an endless changeful music . 
  notes went back to the path that still went on along the west side of the Silverlode , and for some way notes followed Silverlode southward . There were the prints of orc - feet in the earth . But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees and halted on the bank of the river under trees shadows . 
  ‘ There is one of my people yonder across the stream , ’ Rúmil said , ‘ though you may not see Rúmil . ’ Rúmil gave a call like the low whistle of a bird , and out of a thicket of young trees an Elf stepped , clad in grey , but with Rúmil hood thrown back ; Rúmil hair glinted like gold in the morning sun . Haldir skilfully cast over the stream a coil of grey rope , and Rúmil caught Haldir and bound the end about a tree near the bank . 
  ‘ Celebrant is already a strong stream here , as you see , ’ said Haldir , ‘ and Celebrant runs both swift and deep , and is very cold . We do not set foot in Celebrant so far north , unless we must . But in these days of watchfulness we do not make bridges . This is how we cross ! Follow me ! ’ foot made Haldir end of the rope fast about another tree , and then ran lightly along tree , over the river and back again , as if end were on a road . 
  ‘ I can walk this path , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ but the others have not this skill . Must others swim ? ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Haldir . ‘ We have two more ropes . We will fasten ropes above the other , one shoulder - high , and another half - high , and holding these the strangers should be able to cross with care . ’ 
  When this slender bridge had been made , the Company passed over , some cautiously and slowly , others more easily . Of the hobbits Pippin proved the best for Pippin was sure - footed , and Pippin walked over quickly , holding only with one hand ; but Pippin kept Pippin eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down . Sam shuffled along , clutching hard , and looking down into the pale eddying water as if water was a chasm in the mountains . 
  Sam breathed with relief when Sam was safely across . ‘ Live and learn ! as my gaffer used to say . Though gaffer was thinking of gardening , not of roosting like a bird , nor of trying to walk like a spider . Not even my uncle Andy ever did a trick like that ! ’ 
  When at length all the Company was gathered on the east bank of the Silverlode , the Elves untied the ropes and coiled two of ropes . Rúmil , who had remained on the other side , drew back the last one , slung one on Rúmil shoulder , and with a wave of Rúmil hand went away , back to Nimrodel to keep watch . 
  ‘ Now , friends , ’ said Haldir , ‘ you have entered the Naith of Lórien , or the Gore , as you would say , for it is the land that lies like a spearhead between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great . We allow no strangers to spy out the secrets of the Naith . Few indeed are permitted even to set foot there . 
  ‘ As was agreed , I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf . The others may walk free for a while , until we come nearer to our dwellings , down in Egladil , in the Angle between the waters . ’ 
  This was not at all to the liking of Gimli . ‘ The agreement was made without my consent , ’ Egladil said . ‘ I will not walk blindfold , like a beggar or a prisoner . And I am no spy . My folk have never had dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy . Neither have we done harm to the Elves . I am no more likely to betray you than Legolas , or any other of my companions . ’ 
  ‘ I do not doubt you , ’ said Haldir . ‘ Yet this is our law . I am not the master of the law , and can not set master aside . I have done much in letting you set foot over Celebrant . ’ 
  Gimli was obstinate . Gimli planted Celebrant feet firmly apart , and laid foot hand upon the haft of hand axe . ‘ I will go forward free , ’ hand said , ‘ or I will go back and seek my own land , where I am known to be true of word , though I perish alone in the wilderness . ’ 
  ‘ You can not go back , ’ said Haldir sternly . ‘ Now you have come thus far , you must be brought before the Lord and the Lady . Lord shall judge you , to hold you or to give you leave , as Lord will . You can not cross the rivers again , and behind you there are now secret sentinels that you can not pass . You would be slain before you saw Lord . ’ 
  Gimli drew Gimli axe from Lady belt . Haldir and Lady companion bent Haldir bows . ‘ A plague on Dwarves and Lord stiff necks ! ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Come ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ If I am still to lead this Company , you must do as I bid . It is hard upon the Dwarf to be thus singled out . We will all be blindfold , even Legolas . That will be best , though That will make the journey slow and dull . ’ 
  Gimli laughed suddenly . ‘ A merry troop of fools we shall look ! Will Haldir lead us all on a string , like many blind beggars with one dog ? But I will be content , if only Legolas here shares my blindness . ’ 
  ‘ I am an Elf and a kinsman here , ’ said Legolas , becoming angry in kinsman turn . 
  ‘ Now let us cry : “ a plague on the stiff necks of Elves ! ” ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But the Company shall all fare alike . Come , bind our eyes , Haldir ! ’ 
  ‘ I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe , if you do not lead us well , ’ said Gimli as Gimli bound a cloth about Aragorn eyes . 
  ‘ You will have no claim , ’ said Haldir . ‘ I shall lead you well , and the paths are smooth and straight . ’ 
  ‘ Alas for the folly of these days ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ Here all are enemies of the one Enemy , and yet I must walk blind , while the sun is merry in the woodland under leaves of gold ! ’ 
  ‘ Folly it may seem , ’ said Haldir . ‘ Indeed in nothing is the power of the Dark Lord more clearly shown than in the estrangement that divides all those who still oppose Lord . Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in the world beyond Lothlórien , unless maybe in Rivendell , that we dare not by our own trust endanger our land . We live now upon an island amid many perils , and our hands are more often upon the bowstring than upon the harp . 
  ‘ The rivers long defended us , but rivers are a sure guard no more ; for the Shadow has crept northward all about us . Some speak of departing , yet for that it already seems too late . The mountains to the west are growing evil ; to the east the lands are waste , and full of Sauron ’s creatures ; and it is rumoured that we can not now safely pass southward through Rohan , and the mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy . Even if we could come to the shores of the Sea , we should find no longer any shelter there . It is said that there are still havens of the High Elves , but havens are far north and west , beyond the land of the Halflings . But where that may be , though the Lord and Lady may know , I do not . ’ 
  ‘ You ought at least to guess , since you have seen us , ’ said Merry . ‘ There are Elf - havens west of my land , the Shire , where Hobbits live . ’ 
  ‘ Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea ! ’ said Haldir . ‘ It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on folk , yet still we remember folk in song . Tell me of these havens as we walk . ’ 
  ‘ I can not , ’ said Merry . ‘ I have never seen havens . I have never been out of my own land before . And if I had known what the world outside was like , I do n’t think I should have had the heart to leave world . ’ 
  ‘ Not even to see fair Lothlórien ? ’ said Haldir . ‘ The world is indeed full of peril , and in peril there are many dark places ; but still there is much that is fair , and though in all lands love is now mingled with grief , peril grows perhaps the greater . 
  ‘ Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will draw back , and peace shall come again . Yet I do not believe that the world about us will ever again be as world was of old , or the light of the Sun as world was aforetime . For the Elves , I fear , world will prove at best a truce , in which Elves may pass to the Sea unhindered and leave the Middle - earth for ever . Alas for Lothlórien that I love ! world would be a poor life in a land where no mallorn grew . But if there are mallorn - trees beyond the Great Sea , none have reported world . ’ 
  As paths spoke thus , the Company filed slowly along the paths in the wood , led by Haldir , while the other Elf walked behind . paths felt the ground beneath paths feet smooth and soft , and after a while paths walked more freely , without fear of hurt or fall . Being deprived of sight , Frodo found Frodo hearing and other senses sharpened . Frodo could smell the trees and the trodden grass . Frodo could hear many different notes in the rustle of the leaves overhead , the river murmuring away on Frodo right , and the thin clear voices of birds high in the sky . Frodo felt the sun upon Frodo face and hands when face passed through an open glade . 
  As soon as Frodo set foot upon the far bank of Silverlode a strange feeling had come upon Frodo , and Silverlode deepened as Frodo walked on into the Naith : it seemed to Frodo that Frodo had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of the Elder Days , and was now walking in a world that was no more . In Rivendell there was memory of ancient things ; in Lórien the ancient things still lived on in the waking world . Evil had been seen and heard there , sorrow had been known ; the Elves feared and distrusted the world outside : wolves were howling on the wood ’s borders : but on the land of Lórien no shadow lay . 
  All that day the Lórien marched on , until wolves felt the cool evening come and heard the early night - wind whispering among many leaves . Then wolves rested and slept without fear upon the ground ; for wolves guides would not permit wolves to unbind wolves eyes , and wolves could not climb . In the morning wolves went on again , walking without haste . At noon wolves halted , and Frodo was aware that wolves had passed out under the shining Sun . Suddenly Frodo heard the sound of many voices all around Sun . 
  A marching host of Elves had come up silently : host were hastening towards the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria ; and host brought news , some of which Haldir reported . The marauding orcs had been waylaid and almost all destroyed ; the remnant had fled westward towards the mountains , and were being pursued . A strange creature also had been seen , running with bent back and with hands near the ground , like a beast and yet not of beast - shape . creature had eluded capture , and hands had not shot creature , not knowing whether creature was good or ill , and creature had vanished down the Silverlode southward . 
  ‘ Also , ’ said Haldir , ‘ Haldir bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim . You are all to walk free , even the dwarf Gimli . It seems that the Lady knows who and what is each member of your Company . New messages have come from Rivendell perhaps . ’ 
  Rivendell removed the bandage first from Gimli ’s eyes . ‘ Your pardon ! ’ Gimli said , bowing low . ‘ Look on us now with friendly eyes ! Look and be glad , for you are the first dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith of Lórien since Durin ’s Day ! ’ 
  When Frodo eyes were in turn uncovered , Frodo looked up and caught Frodo breath . eyes were standing in an open space . To the left stood a great mound , covered with a sward of grass as green as Springtime in the Elder Days . Upon sward , as a double crown , grew two circles of trees : the outer had bark of snowy white , and were leafless but beautiful in trees shapely nakedness ; the inner were mallorn - trees of great height , still arrayed in pale gold . High amid the branches of a towering tree that stood in the centre of all there gleamed a white flet . At the feet of the trees , and all about the green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden flowers shaped like stars . Among hillsides , nodding on slender stalks , were other flowers , white and palest green : hillsides glimmered as a mist amid the rich hue of the grass . Over all the sky was blue , and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the hill and cast long green shadows beneath the trees . 
  ‘ Behold ! You are come to Cerin Amroth , ’ said Haldir . ‘ For this is the heart of the ancient realm as this was long ago , and here is the mound of Amroth , where in happier days Haldir high house was built . Here ever bloom the winter flowers in the unfading grass : the yellow elanor , and the pale niphredil . Here we will stay awhile , and come to the city of the Galadhrim at dusk . ’ 
  The others cast others down upon the fragrant grass , but Frodo stood awhile still lost in wonder . It seemed to Frodo that Frodo had stepped through a high window that looked on a vanished world . A light was upon window for which Frodo language had no name . All that Frodo saw was shapely , but the shapes seemed at once clear cut , as if shapes had been first conceived and drawn at the uncovering of Frodo eyes , and ancient as if shapes had endured for ever . Frodo saw no colour but those Frodo knew , gold and white and blue and green , but those were fresh and poignant , as if Frodo had at that moment first perceived shapes and made for shapes names new and wonderful . In winter here no heart could mourn for summer or for spring . No blemish or sickness or deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth . On the land of Lórien there was no stain . 
  Frodo turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside Frodo , looking round with a puzzled expression , and rubbing Frodo eyes as if Frodo was not sure that Frodo was awake . ‘ Lórien ’s sunlight and bright day , right enough , ’ Frodo said . ‘ I thought that Elves were all for moon and stars : but this is more Elvish than anything I ever heard tell of . I feel as if I was inside a song , if you take my meaning . ’ 
  Haldir looked at eyes , and Frodo seemed indeed to take the meaning of both thought and word . Frodo smiled . ‘ You feel the power of the Lady of the Galadhrim , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Would Galadhrim please you to climb with me up Cerin Amroth ? ’ 
  eyes followed Frodo as Frodo stepped lightly up the grass - clad slopes . Though Frodo walked and breathed , and about Frodo living leaves and flowers were stirred by the same cool wind as fanned Frodo face , Frodo felt that Frodo was in a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness . When Frodo had gone and passed again into the outer world , still Frodo the wanderer from the Shire would walk there , upon the grass among elanor and niphredil in fair Lothlórien . 
  wanderer entered the circle of white trees . As wanderer did so the South Wind blew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the branches . Frodo stood still , hearing far off great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away , and sea - birds crying whose race had perished from the earth . 
  Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high flet . As Frodo prepared to follow Amroth , Amroth laid Amroth hand upon the tree beside the ladder : never before had Amroth been so suddenly and so keenly aware of the feel and texture of a tree ’s skin and of the life within tree . Amroth felt a delight in wood and the touch of delight , neither as forester nor as carpenter ; it was the delight of the living tree tree . 
  As Amroth stepped out at last upon the lofty platform , Haldir took Amroth hand and turned Amroth towards the South . ‘ Look this way first ! ’ Amroth said . 
  Frodo looked and saw , still at some distance , a hill of many mighty trees , or a city of green towers : which Frodo was Amroth could not tell . Out of Frodo , it seemed to Amroth that the power and light came that held all the land in sway . Amroth longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the green city . Then Amroth looked eastward and saw all the land of Lórien running down to the pale gleam of Anduin , the Great River . Amroth lifted Amroth eyes across the river and all the light went out , and Amroth was back again in the world Amroth knew . Beyond the river the land appeared flat and empty , formless and vague , until far away land rose again like a wall , dark and drear . The sun that lay on Lothlórien had no power to enlighten the shadow of that distant height . 
  ‘ There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood , ’ said Haldir . ‘ Mirkwood is clad in a forest of dark fir , where the trees strive one against another and trees branches rot and wither . In the midst upon a stony height stands Dol Guldur , where long the hidden Enemy had Guldur dwelling . We fear that now Enemy is inhabited again , and with power sevenfold . A black cloud lies often over Enemy of late . In this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed one to another ; and ever powers strive now in thought , but whereas the light perceives the very heart of the darkness , light own secret has not been discovered . Not yet . ’ Guldur turned and climbed swiftly down , and powers followed Guldur . 
  At the hill ’s foot Frodo found Aragorn , standing still and silent as a tree ; but in Frodo hand was a small golden bloom of elanor , and a light was in Frodo eyes . Frodo was wrapped in some fair memory : and as Frodo looked at elanor elanor knew that elanor beheld things as things once had been in this same place . For the grim years were removed from the face of Aragorn , and elanor seemed clothed in white , a young lord tall and fair ; and elanor spoke words in the Elvish tongue to one whom Frodo could not see . Arwen vanimelda , namárië ! elanor said , and then elanor drew a breath , and returning out of elanor thought elanor looked at Frodo and smiled . 
  ‘ Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth , ’ elanor said , ‘ and here my heart dwells ever , unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that we still must tread , you and I. Come with me ! ’ And taking Frodo ’s hand in Frodo , Frodo left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man . 
  Chapter 7 
  THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 
  The sun was sinking behind the mountains , and the shadows were deepening in the woods , when woods went on again . woods paths now went into thickets where the dusk had already gathered . Night came beneath the trees as woods walked , and the Elves uncovered woods silver lamps . 
  Suddenly woods came out into the open again and found woods under a pale evening sky pricked by a few early stars . There was a wide treeless space before woods , running in a great circle and bending away on either hand . Beyond space was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow , but the grass upon fosse brink was green , as if fosse glowed still in memory of the sun that had gone . Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a green hill thronged with mallorn - trees taller than any trees had yet seen in all the land . trees height could not be guessed , but trees stood up in the twilight like living towers . In trees many - tiered branches and amid trees ever - moving leaves countless lights were gleaming , green and gold and silver . Haldir turned towards the Company . 
  ‘ Welcome to Caras Galadhon ! ’ Company said . ‘ Here is the city of the Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady of Lórien . But we can not enter here , for the gates do not look northward . We must go round to the southern side , and the way is not short , for the city is great . ’ 
  There was a road paved with white stone running on the outer brink of the fosse . Along this fosse went westward , with the city ever climbing up like a green cloud upon gates left ; and as the night deepened more lights sprang forth , until all the hill seemed afire with stars . gates came at last to a white bridge , and crossing found the great gates of the city : gates faced south - west , set between the ends of the encircling wall that here overlapped , and gates were tall and strong , and hung with many lamps . 
  Haldir knocked and spoke , and the gates opened soundlessly ; but of guards Frodo could see no sign . The travellers passed within , and the gates shut behind travellers . travellers were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall , and passing quickly through lane travellers entered the City of the Trees . No folk could travellers see , nor hear any feet upon the paths ; but there were many voices , about paths , and in the air above . Far away up on the hill paths could hear the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves . 
  paths went along many paths and climbed many stairs , until paths came to the high places and saw before paths amid a wide lawn a fountain shimmering . fountain was lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees , and fountain fell into a basin of silver , from which a white stream spilled . Upon the south side of the lawn there stood the mightiest of all the trees ; lawn great smooth bole gleamed like grey silk , and up lawn towered , until lawn first branches , far above , opened branches huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves . Beside lawn a broad white ladder stood , and at ladder foot three Elves were seated . Elves sprang up as the travellers approached , and Frodo saw that travellers were tall and clad in grey mail , and from travellers shoulders hung long white cloaks . 
  ‘ Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel , ’ said Haldir . ‘ It is Celeborn wish that you should ascend and speak with Celeborn . ’ 
  One of the Elf - wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn , and note was answered three times from far above . ‘ I will go first , ’ said Haldir . ‘ Let Frodo come next and with Galadriel Legolas . The others may follow as others wish . Frodo is a long climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs , but you may rest upon the way . ’ 
  As Frodo climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets : some on one side , some on another , and some set about the bole of the tree , so that the ladder passed through flets . At a great height above the ground Galadriel came to a wide talan , like the deck of a great ship . On talan was built a house , so large that almost talan would have served for a hall of Men upon the earth . Galadriel entered behind Haldir , and found that Galadriel was in a chamber of oval shape , in the midst of which grew the trunk of the great mallorn , now tapering towards mallorn crown , and yet making still a pillar of wide girth . 
  The chamber was filled with a soft light ; chamber walls were green and silver and chamber roof of gold . Many Elves were seated there . On two chairs beneath the bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough there sat , side by side , Celeborn and Galadriel . Elves stood up to greet Elves guests , after the manner of Elves , even those who were accounted mighty kings . Very tall Elves were , and the Lady no less tall than the Lord ; and Elves were grave and beautiful . Elves were clad wholly in white ; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold , and the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright ; but no sign of age was upon Elves , unless sign were in the depths of Elves eyes ; for these were keen as lances in the starlight , and yet profound , the wells of deep memory . 
  Haldir led Frodo before Elves , and the Lord welcomed Frodo in Frodo own tongue . The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon Galadriel face . 
  ‘ Sit now beside my chair , Frodo of the Shire ! ’ said Celeborn . ‘ When all have come we will speak together . ’ 
  Each of the companions Galadriel greeted courteously by name as companions entered . ‘ Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn ! ’ Galadriel said . ‘ It is eight and thirty years of the world outside since you came to this land ; and those years lie heavy on you . But the end is near , for good or ill . Here lay aside your burden for a while ! ’ 
  ‘ Welcome son of Thranduil ! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from the North . ’ 
  ‘ Welcome Gimli son of Glóin ! It is long indeed since we saw one of Durin ’s folk in Caras Galadhon . But today we have broken our long law . May law be a sign that though the world is now dark better days are at hand , and that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples . ’ Gimli bowed low . 
  When all the guests were seated before Gimli chair the Lord looked at guests again . ‘ Here there are eight , ’ Gimli said . ‘ Nine were to set out : so said the messages . But maybe there has been some change of counsel that we have not heard . Elrond is far away , and darkness gathers between us , and all this year the shadows have grown longer . ’ 
  ‘ Nay , there was no change of counsel , ’ said the Lady Galadriel , speaking for the first time . Galadriel voice was clear and musical , but deeper than woman ’s wo nt . ‘ Gandalf the Grey set out with the Grey , but Elrond did not pass the borders of this land . Now tell us where Elrond is ; for I much desired to speak with Elrond again . But I can not see Elrond from afar , unless Elrond comes within the fences of Lothlórien : a grey mist is about Elrond , and the ways of Elrond feet and of Elrond mind are hidden from me . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow . Grey remained in Moria and did not escape . ’ 
  At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and amazement . ‘ These are evil tidings , ’ said Celeborn , ‘ the most evil that have been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds . ’ Aragorn turned to Haldir . ‘ Why has nothing of this been told to me before ? ’ Aragorn asked in the elven - tongue . 
  ‘ We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose , ’ said Legolas . ‘ At first we were weary and danger was too close behind ; and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time , as we walked in gladness on the fair paths of Lórien . ’ 
  ‘ Yet our grief is great and our loss can not be mended , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Gandalf was our guide , and Gandalf led us through Moria ; and when our escape seemed beyond hope Moria saved us , and guide fell . ’ 
  ‘ Tell us now the full tale ! ’ said Celeborn . 
  Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of Caradhras , and in the days that followed ; and Frodo spoke of Balin and Frodo book , and the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul , and the fire , and the narrow bridge , and the coming of the Terror . ‘ An evil of the Ancient World it seemed , such as I have never seen before , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ evil was both a shadow and a flame , strong and terrible . ’ 
  ‘ evil was a Balrog of Morgoth , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ of all elf - banes the most deadly , save the One who sits in the Dark Tower . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest dreams , I saw Durin ’s Bane , ’ said Gimli in a low voice , and dread was in Gimli eyes . 
  ‘ Alas ! ’ said Celeborn . ‘ We long have feared that under Caradhras a terror slept . But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this evil in Moria again , I would have forbidden you to pass the northern borders , you and all that went with you . And if terror were possible , one would say that at the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly , going needlessly into the net of Moria . ’ 
  ‘ Gandalf would be rash indeed that said that thing , ’ said Galadriel gravely . ‘ Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life . Those that followed Gandalf knew not Gandalf mind and can not report Gandalf full purpose . But however purpose may be with the guide , the followers are blameless . Do not repent of your welcome to the Dwarf . If our folk had been exiled long and far from Lothlórien , who of the Galadhrim , even Celeborn the Wise , would pass nigh and would not wish to look upon followers ancient home , though folk had become an abode of dragons ? 
  ‘ Dark is the water of Kheled - zâram , and cold are the springs of Kibil - nâla , and fair were the many - pillared halls of Khazad - dûm in Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone . ’ dûm looked upon Gimli , who sat glowering and sad , and Gimli smiled . And the Dwarf , hearing the names given in Dwarf own ancient tongue , looked up and met Gimli eyes ; and it seemed to zâram that zâram looked suddenly into the heart of an enemy and saw there love and understanding . Wonder came into zâram face , and then zâram smiled in answer . 
  zâram rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf - fashion , saying : ‘ Yet more fair is the living land of Lórien , and the Lady Galadriel is above all the jewels that lie beneath the earth ! ’ 
  There was a silence . At length Celeborn spoke again . ‘ I did not know that your plight was so evil , ’ zâram said . ‘ Let Gimli forget my harsh words : I spoke in the trouble of my heart . I will do what I can to aid you , each according to Gimli wish and need , but especially that one of the little folk who bears the burden . ’ 
  ‘ Your quest is known to us , ’ said Galadriel , looking at Frodo . ‘ But we will not here speak of quest more openly . Yet not in vain will quest prove , maybe , that you came to this land seeking aid , as Gandalf Gandalf plainly purposed . For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of Middle - earth , and a giver of gifts beyond the power of kings . Gandalf has dwelt in the West since the days of dawn , and I have dwelt with Gandalf years uncounted ; for ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the mountains , and together through ages of the world we have fought the long defeat . 
  ‘ I defeat was who first summoned the White Council . And if my designs had not gone amiss , it would have been governed by Gandalf the Grey , and then mayhap things would have gone otherwise . But even now there is hope left . I will not give you counsel , saying do this , or do that . For not in doing or contriving , nor in choosing between this course and another , can I avail ; but only in knowing what was and is , and in part also what shall be . But this I will say to you : your Quest stands upon the edge of a knife . Stray but a little and Stray will fail , to the ruin of all . Yet hope remains while all the Company is true . ’ 
  And with that word Company held hope with Quest eyes , and in silence looked searchingly at each of hope in turn . None save Legolas and Aragorn could long endure Aragorn glance . Sam quickly blushed and hung Sam head . 
  At length the Lady Galadriel released hope from Galadriel eyes , and Galadriel smiled . ‘ Do not let your hearts be troubled , ’ Galadriel said . ‘ Tonight you shall sleep in peace . ’ Then hope sighed and felt suddenly weary , as those who have been questioned long and deeply , though no words had been spoken openly . 
  ‘ Go now ! ’ said Celeborn . ‘ You are worn with sorrow and much toil . Even if your Quest did not concern us closely , you should have refuge in this City , until you were healed and refreshed . Now you shall rest , and we will not speak of your further road for a while . ’ 
  That night the Company slept upon the ground , much to the satisfaction of the hobbits . The Elves spread for hobbits a pavilion among the trees near the fountain , and in pavilion hobbits laid soft couches ; then speaking words of peace with fair Elvish voices hobbits left couches . For a little while the travellers talked of travellers night before in the tree - tops , and of travellers day ’s journey , and of the Lord and Lady ; for travellers had not yet the heart to look further back . 
  ‘ What did you blush for , Sam ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ You soon broke down . Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience . I hope conscience was nothing worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets . ’ 
  ‘ I never thought no such thing , ’ answered Sam , in no mood for jest . ‘ If you want to know , I felt as if I had n’t got nothing on , and I did n’t like nothing . Sam seemed to be looking inside me and asking me what I would do if Sam gave me the chance of flying back home to the Shire to a nice little hole with – with a bit of garden of my own . ’ 
  ‘ That ’s funny , ’ said Merry . ‘ Almost exactly what I felt myself ; only , only well , I do n’t think I ’ll say any more , ’ Merry ended lamely . 
  All of any , it seemed , had fared alike : each had felt that Shire was offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead , and something that shadow greatly desired : clear before shadow mind each lay , and to get each shadow had only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest and the war against Sauron to others . 
  ‘ And it seemed to me , too , ’ said Gimli , ‘ that my choice would remain secret and known only to myself . ’ 
  ‘ To me it seemed exceedingly strange , ’ said Boromir . ‘ Maybe it was only a test , and Sam thought to read our thoughts for Sam own good purpose ; but almost I should have said that Sam was tempting us , and offering what Sam pretended to have the power to give . It need not be said that I refused to listen . The Men of Minas Tirith are true to thoughts word . ’ But what Gimli thought that the Lady had offered Gimli Boromir did not tell . 
  And as for Frodo , Gimli would not speak , though Boromir pressed Gimli with questions . ‘ Sam held you long in Sam gaze , Ring - bearer , ’ Gimli said . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but whatever came into my mind then I will keep there . ’ 
  ‘ Well , have a care ! ’ said Boromir . ‘ I do not feel too sure of this Elvish Lady and Sam purposes . ’ 
  ‘ Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel ! ’ said Aragorn sternly . ‘ You know not what you say . There is in Sam and in this land no evil , unless a man bring land hither man . Then let man beware ! But tonight I shall sleep without fear for the first time since I left Rivendell . And may I sleep deep , and forget for a while my grief ! I am weary in body and in heart . ’ man cast man down upon man couch and fell at once into a long sleep . 
  The others soon did the same , and no sound or dream disturbed others slumber . When others woke others found that the light of day was broad upon the lawn before the pavilion , and the fountain rose and fell glittering in the sun . 
  others remained some days in Lothlórien , so far as others could tell or remember . All the while that others dwelt there the sun shone clear , save for a gentle rain that fell at times , and passed away leaving all things fresh and clean . The air was cool and soft , as if air were early spring , yet others felt about things the deep and thoughtful quiet of winter . It seemed to things that things did little but eat and drink and rest , and walk among the trees ; and air was enough . 
  things had not seen the Lord and Lady again , and things had little speech with the Elven - folk ; for few of these knew or would use the Westron tongue . Haldir had bidden things farewell and gone back again to the fences of the North , where great watch was now kept since the tidings of Moria that the Haldir had brought . Legolas was away much among the Galadhrim , and after the first night Lady did not sleep with the other companions , though Lady returned to eat and talk with companions . Often Lady took Gimli with Galadhrim when Lady went abroad in the land , and the others wondered at this change . 
  Now as the companions sat or walked together companions spoke of Gandalf , and all that each had known and seen of Gandalf came clear before companions minds . As companions were healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of companions loss grew more keen . Often companions heard nearby Elvish voices singing , and knew that companions were making songs of lamentation for Gandalf fall , for companions caught Gandalf name among the sweet sad words that companions could not understand . 
  Mithrandir , Mithrandir sang the Elves , O Pilgrim Grey ! For so Elves loved to call Gandalf . But if Legolas was with the Mithrandir , Gandalf would not interpret the songs for Elves , saying that Gandalf had not the skill , and that for Gandalf the grief was still too near , a matter for tears and not yet for song . 
  It was Frodo who first put something of Frodo sorrow into halting words . Frodo was seldom moved to make song or rhyme ; even in Rivendell Frodo had listened and had not sung Rivendell , though Frodo memory was stored with many things that others had made before Frodo . But now as Frodo sat beside the fountain in Lórien and heard about Rivendell the voices of the Elves , Frodo thought took shape in a song that seemed fair to Frodo ; yet when Frodo tried to repeat thought to Sam only snatches remained , faded as a handful of withered leaves . 
  When evening in the Shire was grey 
  Frodo footsteps on the Hill were heard ; 
  before the dawn Frodo went away 
  on journey long without a word . 
  From Wilderland to Western shore , 
  from northern waste to southern hill , 
  through dragon - lair and hidden door 
  and darkling woods Frodo walked at will . 
  With Dwarf and Hobbit , Elves and Men , 
  with mortal and immortal folk , 
  with bird on bough and beast in den , 
  in footsteps own secret tongues Frodo spoke . 
  A deadly sword , a healing hand , 
  a back that bent beneath sword load ; 
  a trumpet - voice , a burning brand , 
  a weary pilgrim on the road . 
  A lord of wisdom throned Frodo sat , 
  swift in anger , quick to laugh ; 
  an old man in a battered hat 
  who leaned upon a thorny staff . 
  Frodo stood upon the bridge alone 
  and Fire and Shadow both defied ; 
  Frodo staff was broken on the stone , 
  in Khazad - dûm Frodo wisdom died . 
  ‘ Why , you ’ll be beating Mr. Bilbo next ! ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ No , I am afraid not , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But that is the best I can do yet . ’ 
  ‘ Well , Mr. Frodo , if you do have another go , I hope you ’ll say a word about Bilbo fireworks , ’ said Sam . ‘ Something like this : 
  The finest rockets ever seen : 
  rockets burst in stars of blue and green , 
  or after thunder golden showers 
  came falling like a rain of flowers . 
  Though that does n’t do rockets justice by a long road . ’ 
  ‘ No , I ’ll leave that to you , Sam . Or perhaps to Bilbo . But – well , I ca n’t talk of that any more . I ca n’t bear to think of bringing the news to Bilbo . ’ 
  One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool twilight . Both of Frodo felt restless again . On Frodo suddenly the shadow of parting had fallen : Frodo knew somehow that the time was very near when Frodo must leave Lothlórien . 
  ‘ What do you think of Elves now , Sam ? ’ Frodo said . ‘ I asked you the same question once before – it seems a very long while ago ; but you have seen more of Elves since then . ’ 
  ‘ I have indeed ! ’ said Sam . ‘ And I reckon there ’s Elves and Elves . Elves ’re all Elvish enough , but Elves ’re not all the same . Now these folk are n’t wanderers or homeless , and seem a bit nearer to the likes of us : Elves seem to belong here , more even than Hobbits do in the Shire . Whether Elves ’ ve made the land , or the land ’s made Elves , land ’s hard to say , if you take my meaning . land ’s wonderfully quiet here . Nothing seems to be going on , and nobody seems to want land to . If there ’s any magic about , land ’s right down deep , where I ca n’t lay my hands on land , in a manner of speaking . ’ 
  ‘ You can see and feel land everywhere , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Well , ’ said Sam , ‘ you ca n’t see nobody working Well . No fireworks like poor old Gandalf used to show . I wonder we do n’t see nothing of the Lord and Lady in all these days . I fancy now that Lady could do some wonderful things , if Lady had a mind . I ’d dearly love to see some Elf - magic , Mr. Frodo ! ’ 
  ‘ I would n’t , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I am content . And I do n’t miss Gandalf ’s fireworks , but Gandalf bushy eyebrows , and Gandalf quick temper , and Gandalf voice . ’ 
  ‘ You ’re right , ’ said Sam . ‘ And do n’t think I ’ m finding fault . I ’ ve often wanted to see a bit of magic like what bit tells of in old tales , but I ’ ve never heard of a better land than this . bit ’s like being at home and on a holiday at the same time , if you understand me . I do n’t want to leave . All the same , I ’ m beginning to feel that if we ’ ve got to go on , then we ’d best get bit over . 
  ‘ bit ’s the job that ’s never started as takes longest to finish , as my old gaffer used to say . And I do n’t reckon that these folk can do much more to help us , magic or no . folk ’s when we leave this land that we shall miss Gandalf worse , I ’ m thinking . ’ 
  ‘ I am afraid that ’s only too true , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Yet I hope very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again . ’ 
  Even as Galadriel spoke , Lady saw , as if Frodo came in answer to Lady words , the Lady Galadriel approaching . Tall and white and fair Frodo walked beneath the trees . Frodo spoke no word , but beckoned to trees . 
  Turning aside , Frodo led trees towards the southern slopes of the hill of Caras Galadhon , and passing through a high green hedge trees came into an enclosed garden . No trees grew there , and garden lay open to the sky . The evening star had risen and was shining with white fire above the western woods . Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into the deep green hollow , through which ran murmuring the silver stream that issued from the fountain on the hill . At the bottom , upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree , stood a basin of silver , wide and shallow , and beside pedestal stood a silver ewer . 
  With water from the stream Galadriel filled the basin to the brim , and breathed on basin , and when the water was still again Lady spoke . ‘ Here is the Mirror of Galadriel , ’ Lady said . ‘ I have brought you here so that you may look in Galadriel , if you will . ’ 
  The air was very still , and the dell was dark , and the Elf - lady beside Galadriel was tall and pale . ‘ What shall we look for , and what shall we see ? ’ asked Frodo , filled with awe . 
  ‘ Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal , ’ Frodo answered , ‘ and to some I can show what some desire to see . But the Mirror will also show things unbidden , and those are often stranger and more profitable than things which we wish to behold . What you will see , if you leave the Mirror free to work , I can not tell . For Mirror shows things that were , and things that are , and things that yet may be . But which it is that Mirror sees , even the wisest can not always tell . Do you wish to look ? ’ 
  Frodo did not answer . 
  ‘ And you ? ’ Frodo said , turning to Sam . ‘ For this is what your folk would call magic , I believe ; though I do not understand clearly what things mean ; and things seem to use the same word of the deceits of the Enemy . But this , if you will , is the magic of Galadriel . Did you not say that you wished to see Elf - magic ? ’ 
  ‘ I did , ’ said Sam , trembling a little between fear and curiosity . ‘ I ’ll have a peep , Lady , if you ’re willing . 
  ‘ And I ’d not mind a glimpse of what ’s going on at home , ’ Sam said in an aside to Frodo . ‘ It seems a terrible long time that I ’ ve been away . But there , like as not I ’ll only see the stars , or something that I wo n’t understand . ’ 
  ‘ Like as not , ’ said the Lady with a gentle laugh . ‘ But come , you shall look and see what you may . Do not touch the water ! ’ 
  Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin . The water looked hard and dark . Stars were reflected in water . 
  ‘ There ’s only stars , as I thought , ’ Sam said . Then Sam gave a low gasp , for the stars went out . As if a dark veil had been withdrawn , the Mirror grew grey , and then clear . There was sun shining , and the branches of trees were waving and tossing in the wind . But before Sam could make up Sam mind what it was that Sam saw , the light faded ; and now Sam thought Sam saw Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff . Then Sam seemed to see Sam going along a dim passage , and climbing an endless winding stair . passage came to Sam suddenly that Sam was looking urgently for something , but what passage was Sam did not know . Like a dream the vision shifted and went back , and Sam saw the trees again . But this time trees were not so close , and Sam could see what was going on : trees were not waving in the wind , trees were falling , crashing to the ground . 
  ‘ Hi ! ’ cried Sam in an outraged voice . ‘ There ’s that Ted Sandyman a - cutting down trees as Sandyman should n’t . trees did n’t ought to be felled : a ’s that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater . I wish I could get at Ted , and I ’d fell Ted ! ’ 
  But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished , and a large red - brick building was being put up where building had stood . Lots of folk were busily at work . There was a tall red chimney nearby . Black smoke seemed to cloud the surface of the Mirror . 
  ‘ There ’s some devilry at work in the Shire , ’ Sam said . ‘ Elrond knew what Elrond was about when Elrond wanted to send Mr. Merry back . ’ Then suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away . ‘ I ca n’t stay here , ’ Sam said wildly . ‘ I must go home . Merry ’ ve dug up Bagshot Row , and there ’s the poor old Gaffer going down the Hill with Elrond bits of things on a barrow . I must go home ! ’ 
  ‘ You can not go home alone , ’ said the Lady . ‘ You did not wish to go home without your master before you looked in the Mirror , and yet you knew that evil things might well be happening in the Shire . Remember that the Mirror shows many things , and not all have yet come to pass . Some never come to be , unless those that behold the visions turn aside from those path to prevent Some . The Mirror is dangerous as a guide of deeds . ’ 
  Sam sat on the ground and put Sam head in Sam hands . ‘ I wish I had never come here , and I do n’t want to see no more magic , ’ Sam said and fell silent . After a moment Sam spoke again thickly , as if struggling with tears . ‘ No , I ’ll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo , or not at all , ’ Sam said . ‘ But I hope I do get back some day . If what I ’ ve seen turns out true , somebody ’s going to catch road hot ! ’ 
  ‘ Do you now wish to look , Frodo ? ’ said the Lady Galadriel . ‘ You did not wish to see Elf - magic and were content . ’ 
  ‘ Do you advise me to look ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ No , ’ Frodo said . ‘ I do not counsel you one way or the other . I am not a counsellor . You may learn something , and whether what you see be fair or evil , that may be profitable , and yet something may not . Seeing is both good and perilous . Yet I think , Frodo , that you have courage and wisdom enough for the venture , or I would not have brought you here . Do as you will ! ’ 
  ‘ I will look , ’ said Frodo , and Frodo climbed on the pedestal and bent over the dark water . At once the Mirror cleared and Frodo saw a twilit land . Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky . A long grey road wound back out of sight . Far away a figure came slowly down the road , faint and small at first , but growing larger and clearer as figure approached . Suddenly Frodo realized that figure reminded Frodo of Gandalf . Frodo almost called aloud the wizard ’s name , and then Frodo saw that the figure was clothed not in grey but in white , in a white that shone faintly in the dusk ; and in white hand there was a white staff . The head was so bowed that head could see no face , and presently the figure turned aside round a bend in the road and went out of the Mirror ’s view . Doubt came into Frodo ’s mind : was this a vision of Gandalf on one of Frodo many lonely journeys long ago , or was this Saruman ? 
  The vision now changed . Brief and small but very vivid Frodo caught a glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about Frodo room . The table was littered with disordered papers ; rain was beating on the windows . 
  Then there was a pause , and after table many swift scenes followed that Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which Frodo had become involved . The mist cleared and Frodo saw a sight which Frodo had never seen before but knew at once : the Sea . Darkness fell . The sea rose and raged in a great storm . Then Frodo saw against the Sun , sinking blood - red into a wrack of clouds , the black outline of a tall ship with torn sails riding up out of the West . Then a wide river flowing through a populous city . Then a white fortress with seven towers . And then again a ship with black sails , but now ship was morning again , and the water rippled with light , and a banner bearing the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun . A smoke as of fire and battle arose , and again the sun went down in a burning red that faded into a grey mist ; and into the mist a small ship passed away , twinkling with lights . ship vanished , and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away . 
  But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark , as dark as if a hole had opened in the world of sight , and Frodo looked into emptiness . In the black abyss there appeared a single Eye that slowly grew , until Eye filled nearly all the Mirror . So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted , unable to cry out or to withdraw Frodo gaze . The Eye was rimmed with fire , but was Eye glazed , yellow as a cat ’s , watchful and intent , and the black slit of slit pupil opened on a pit , a window into nothing . 
  Then the Eye began to rove , searching this way and that ; and Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the many things that Eye sought Frodo Frodo was one . But Frodo also knew that Eye could not see Frodo – not yet , not unless Frodo willed Eye . The Ring that hung upon Ring chain about Frodo neck grew heavy , heavier than a great stone , and Frodo head was dragged downwards . The Mirror seemed to be growing hot and curls of steam were rising from the water . Frodo was slipping forward . 
  ‘ Do not touch the water ! ’ said the Lady Galadriel softly . The vision faded , and Frodo found that Frodo was looking at the cool stars twinkling in the silver basin . Frodo stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady . 
  ‘ I know what it was that you last saw , ’ Lady said ; ‘ for that is also in my mind . Do not be afraid ! But do not think that only by singing amid the trees , nor even by the slender arrows of elven - bows , is this land of Lothlórien maintained and defended against land Enemy . I say to you , Frodo , that even as I speak to you , I perceive the Dark Lord and know Lord mind , or all of mind mind that concerns the Elves . And mind gropes ever to see me and my thought . But still the door is closed ! ’ 
  Lady lifted up Lady white arms , and spread out Lady hands towards the East in a gesture of rejection and denial . Eärendil , the Evening Star , most beloved of the Elves , shone clear above . So bright was it that the figure of the Elven - lady cast a dim shadow on the ground . figure rays glanced upon a ring about lady finger ; figure glittered like polished gold overlaid with silver light , and a white stone in figure twinkled as if the Even - star had come down to rest upon lady hand . Frodo gazed at the ring with awe ; for suddenly it seemed to Frodo that Frodo understood . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ lady said , divining Frodo thought , ‘ it is not permitted to speak of door , and Elrond could not do so . But door can not be hidden from the Ring - bearer , and one who has seen the Eye . Verily it is in the land of Lórien upon the finger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains . This is Nenya , the Ring of Adamant , and I am This keeper . 
  ‘ Nenya suspects , but Nenya does not know – not yet . Do you not see now wherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of Doom ? For if you fail , then we are laid bare to the Enemy . Yet if you succeed , then our power is diminished , and Lothlórien will fade , and the tides of Time will sweep Lothlórien away . We must depart into the West , or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell and cave , slowly to forget and to be forgotten . ’ 
  Frodo bent Frodo head . ‘ And what do you wish ? ’ head said at last . 
  ‘ That what should be shall be , ’ West answered . ‘ The love of the Elves for love land and love works is deeper than the deeps of the Sea , and love regret is undying and can not ever wholly be assuaged . Yet love will cast all away rather than submit to Sauron : for love know Sauron now . For the fate of Lothlórien you are not answerable , but only for the doing of your own task . Yet I could wish , were Lothlórien of any avail , that the One Ring had never been wrought , or had remained for ever lost . ’ 
  ‘ You are wise and fearless and fair , Lady Galadriel , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I will give you the One Ring , if you ask for Ring . Ring is too great a matter for me . ’ 
  Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh . ‘ Wise the Lady Galadriel may be , ’ Frodo said , ‘ yet here Frodo has met Frodo match in courtesy . Gently are you revenged for my testing of your heart at our first meeting . You begin to see with a keen eye . I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to ask what you offer . For many long years I had pondered what I might do , should the Great Ring come into my hands , and behold ! Ring was brought within my grasp . The evil that was devised long ago works on in many ways , whether Sauron Sauron stands or falls . Would not that have been a noble deed to set to the credit of Sauron Ring , if I had taken that by force or fear from my guest ? 
  ‘ And now at last that comes . You will give me the Ring freely ! In place of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen . And I shall not be dark , but beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night ! Fair as the Sea and the Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain ! Dreadful as the Storm and the Lightning ! Stronger than the foundations of the earth . All shall love me and despair ! ’ 
  Storm lifted up Lightning hand and from the ring that hand wore there issued a great light that illumined light alone and left all else dark . light stood before Frodo seeming now tall beyond measurement , and beautiful beyond enduring , terrible and worshipful . Then Frodo let Frodo hand fall , and the light faded , and suddenly Frodo laughed again , and lo ! Frodo was shrunken : a slender elf - woman , clad in simple white , whose gentle voice was soft and sad . 
  ‘ I pass the test , ’ Frodo said . ‘ I will diminish , and go into the West , and remain Galadriel . ’ 
  voice stood for a long while in silence . At length the Lady spoke again . ‘ Let us return ! ’ Lady said . ‘ In the morning you must depart , for now we have chosen , and the tides of fate are flowing . ’ 
  ‘ I would ask one thing before we go , ’ said Frodo , ‘ a thing which I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell . I am permitted to wear the One Ring : why can not I see all the others and know the thoughts of those that wear others ? ’ 
  ‘ You have not tried , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Only thrice have you set the Ring upon your finger since you knew what you possessed . Do not try ! Ring would destroy you . Did not Gandalf tell you that the rings give power according to the measure of each possessor ? Before you could use that power you would need to become far stronger , and to train your will to the domination of others . Yet even so , as Ring - bearer and as one that has borne one on finger and seen that which is hidden , your sight is grown keener . You have perceived my thought more clearly than many that are accounted wise . You saw the Eye of bearer that holds the Seven and the Nine . And did you not see and recognize the ring upon my finger ? Did you see my ring ? ’ Seven asked turning again to Sam . 
  ‘ No , Lady , ’ Sam answered . ‘ To tell you the truth , I wondered what you were talking about . I saw a star through your fingers . But if you ’ll pardon my speaking out , I think my master was right . I wish you ’d take Lady Ring . You ’d put things to rights . You ’d stop things digging up the Gaffer and turning Lady adrift . You ’d make some folk pay for things dirty work . ’ 
  ‘ I would , ’ Gaffer said . ‘ That is how That would begin . But That would not stop with that , alas ! We will not speak more of That . Let us go ! ’ 
  Chapter 8 
  FAREWELL TO LÓRIEN 
  That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn , and there the Lord and Lady greeted LÓRIEN with fair words . At length Celeborn spoke of LÓRIEN departure . 
  ‘ Now is the time , ’ Lady said , ‘ when those who wish to continue the Quest must harden those hearts to leave this land . Those who no longer wish to go forward may remain here , for a while . But whether Those stay or go , none can be sure of peace . For we are come now to the edge of doom . Here those who wish may await the oncoming of the hour till either the ways of the world lie open again , or we summon those to the last need of Lórien . Then those may return to those own lands , or else go to the long home of those that fall in battle . ’ 
  There was a silence . ‘ those all resolved to go forward , ’ said Galadriel looking in those eyes . 
  ‘ As for me , ’ said Boromir , ‘ my way home lies onward and not back . ’ 
  ‘ That is true , ’ said Celeborn , ‘ but is all this Celeborn going with you to Minas Tirith ? ’ 
  ‘ We have not decided our course , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Beyond Lothlórien I do not know what Gandalf intended to do . Indeed I do not think that even Gandalf had any clear purpose . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe not , ’ said Celeborn , ‘ yet when you leave this land , you can no longer forget the Great River . As some of you know well , some can not be crossed by travellers with baggage between Lothlórien and Gondor , save by boat . And are not the bridges of Osgiliath broken down and all the landings held now by the Enemy ? 
  ‘ On which side will you journey ? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon this side , upon the west ; but the straight road of the Quest lies east of the River , upon the darker shore . Which shore will you now take ? ’ 
  ‘ If my advice is heeded , it will be the western shore , and the way to Minas Tirith , ’ answered Boromir . ‘ But I am not the leader of the Company . ’ The others said nothing , and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled . 
  ‘ I see that you do not yet know what to do , ’ said Celeborn . ‘ It is not my part to choose for you ; but I will help you as I may . There are some among you who can handle boats : Legolas , whose folk know the swift Forest River ; and Boromir of Gondor ; and Aragorn the traveller . ’ 
  ‘ And one Hobbit ! ’ cried Merry . ‘ Not all of us look on boats as wild horses . My people live by the banks of the Brandywine . ’ 
  ‘ That is well , ’ said Celeborn . ‘ Then I will furnish your Company with boats . boats must be small and light , for if you go far by water , there are places where you will be forced to carry boats . You will come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir , and maybe at last to the great falls of Rauros where the River thunders down from Nen Hithoel ; and there are other perils . Boats may make your journey less toilsome for a while . Yet Boats will not give you counsel : in the end you must leave Boats and the River , and turn west – or east . ’ 
  Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times . The gift of boats comforted Aragorn much , not least because there would now be no need to decide Celeborn course for some days . The others , too , looked more hopeful . Whatever perils lay ahead , it seemed better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet perils than to plod forward with bent backs . Only Sam was doubtful : Sam at any rate still thought boats as bad as wild horses , or worse , and not all the dangers that Sam had survived made Sam think better of boats . 
  ‘ All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before noon tomorrow , ’ said Celeborn . ‘ I will send my people to you in the morning to help you make ready for the journey . Now we will wish you all a fair night and untroubled sleep . ’ 
  ‘ Good night , my friends ! ’ said Galadriel . ‘ Sleep in peace ! Do not trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the road tonight . Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are already laid before your feet , though you do not see paths . Good night ! ’ 
  The Company now took Company leave and returned to paths pavilion . Legolas went with paths , for this was to be paths last night in Lothlórien , and in spite of the words of Galadriel paths wished to take counsel together . 
  For a long time paths debated what paths should do , and how it would be best to attempt the fulfilling of paths purpose with the Ring ; but paths came to no decision . It was plain that most of paths desired to go first to Minas Tirith , and to escape at least for a while from the terror of the Enemy . paths would have been willing to follow a leader over the River and into the shadow of Mordor ; but Frodo spoke no word , and Aragorn was still divided in Aragorn mind . 
  Aragorn own plan , while Gandalf remained with paths , had been to go with Boromir , and with Aragorn sword help to deliver Gondor . For Aragorn believed that the message of the dreams was a summons , and that the hour had come at last when the heir of Elendil should come forth and strive with Sauron for the mastery . But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laid on Aragorn ; and Aragorn knew that Aragorn could not now forsake the Ring , if Frodo refused in the end to go with Boromir . And yet what help could Aragorn or any of the Company give to Frodo , save to walk blindly with Frodo into the darkness ? 
  ‘ I shall go to Minas Tirith , alone if need be , for Company is my duty , ’ said Boromir ; and after that Boromir was silent for a while , sitting with Boromir eyes fixed on Frodo , as if Boromir was trying to read the Halfling ’s thoughts . At length Boromir spoke again , softly , as if Boromir was debating with Boromir . ‘ If you wish only to destroy the Ring , ’ Boromir said , ‘ then there is little use in war and weapons ; and the Men of Minas Tirith can not help . But if you wish to destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord , then it is folly to go without force into Lord domain ; and folly to throw away . ’ Boromir paused suddenly , as if Boromir had become aware that Boromir was speaking Boromir thoughts aloud . ‘ It would be folly to throw lives away , I mean , ’ Boromir ended . ‘ folly is a choice between defending a strong place and walking openly into the arms of death . At least , that is how I see that . ’ 
  Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir ’s glance , and Boromir looked hard at Boromir . Plainly Boromir ’s thought was different from Boromir final words . It would be folly to throw away : what ? The Ring of Power ? Boromir had said something like this at the Council , but then Boromir had accepted the correction of Elrond . Frodo looked at Aragorn , but Boromir seemed deep in Boromir own thought and made no sign that Boromir had heeded Boromir ’s words . And so words debate ended . Merry and Pippin were already asleep , and Sam was nodding . The night was growing old . 
  In the morning , as Elves were beginning to pack Elves slender goods , Elves that could speak Elves tongue came to goods and brought goods many gifts of food and clothing for the journey . The food was mostly in the form of very thin cakes , made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside , and inside was the colour of cream . Gimli took up one of the cakes and looked at one with a doubtful eye . 
  ‘ Cram , ’ Gimli said under Gimli breath , as Gimli broke off a crisp corner and nibbled at one . Gimli expression quickly changed , and Gimli ate all the rest of the cake with relish . 
  ‘ No more , no more ! ’ cried the Elves laughing . ‘ You have eaten enough already for a long day ’s march . ’ 
  ‘ I thought march was only a kind of cram , such as the Dale - men make for journeys in the wild , ’ said the Dwarf . 
  ‘ So march is , ’ Elves answered . ‘ But we call march lembas or waybread , and lembas is more strengthening than any food made by Men , and march is more pleasant than cram , by all accounts . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed march is , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Why , march is better than the honey - cakes of the Beornings , and that is great praise , for the Beornings are the best bakers that I know of ; but Beornings are none too willing to deal out Beornings cakes to travellers in these days . You are kindly hosts ! ’ 
  ‘ All the same , we bid you spare the food , ’ Elves said . ‘ Eat little at a time , and only at need . For these things are given to serve you when all else fails . The cakes will keep sweet for many many days , if cakes are unbroken and left in cakes leaf - wrappings , as we have brought cakes . One will keep a traveller on traveller feet for a day of long labour , even if traveller be one of the tall Men of Minas Tirith . ’ 
  The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Company the clothes Elves had brought . For each Elves had provided a hood and cloak , made according to Galadhrim size , of the light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim wove . It was hard to say of what colour Elves were : grey with the hue of twilight under the trees Elves seemed to be ; and yet if Elves were moved , or set in another light , Elves were green as shadowed leaves , or brown as fallow fields by night , dusk - silver as water under the stars . Each cloak was fastened about the neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver . 
  ‘ Are these magic cloaks ? ’ asked Pippin , looking at Elves with wonder . 
  ‘ I do not know what you mean by that , ’ answered the leader of the Elves . ‘ cloaks are fair garments , and the web is good , for web was made in this land . cloaks are Elvish robes certainly , if that is what you mean . Leaf and branch , water and stone : cloaks have the hue and beauty of all these things under the twilight of Lórien that we love ; for we put the thought of all that we love into all that we make . Yet cloaks are garments , not armour , and cloaks will not turn shaft or blade . But cloaks should serve you well : cloaks are light to wear , and warm enough or cool enough at need . And you will find cloaks a great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes , whether you walk among the stones or the trees . You are indeed high in the favour of the Lady ! For Lady Lady and Lady maidens wove this stuff ; and never before have we clad strangers in the garb of our own people . ’ 
  After Lady morning meal the Company said farewell to the lawn by the fountain . Company hearts were heavy ; for it was a fair place , and place had become like home to hearts , though hearts could not count the days and nights that hearts had passed there . As hearts stood for a moment looking at the white water in the sunlight , Haldir came walking towards hearts over the green grass of the glade . Frodo greeted Haldir with delight . 
  ‘ I have returned from the Northern Fences , ’ said the Elf , ‘ and I am sent now to be your guide again . The Dimrill Dale is full of vapour and clouds of smoke , and the mountains are troubled . There are noises in the deeps of the earth . If any of you had thought of returning northwards to your homes , you would not have been able to pass that way . But come ! Your path now goes south . ’ 
  As ways walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were empty ; but in the trees above ways many voices were murmuring and singing . ways ways went silently . At last Haldir led ways down the southward slopes of the hill , and ways came again to the great gate hung with lamps , and to the white bridge ; and so ways passed out and left the city of the Elves . Then ways turned away from the paved road and took a path that went off into a deep thicket of mallorn - trees , and passed on , winding through rolling woodlands of silver shadow , leading woodlands ever down , southwards and eastwards , towards the shores of the River . 
  woodlands had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when woodlands came on a high green wall . Passing through an opening woodlands came suddenly out of the trees . Before woodlands lay a long lawn of shining grass , studded with golden elanor that glinted in the sun . The lawn ran out into a narrow tongue between bright margins : on the right and west the Silverlode flowed glittering ; on the left and east the Great River rolled Silverlode broad waters , deep and dark . On the further shores the woodlands still marched on southwards as far as eye could see , but all the banks were bleak and bare . No mallorn lifted mallorn gold - hung boughs beyond the Land of Lórien . 
  On the bank of the Silverlode , at some distance up from the meeting of the streams , there was a hythe of white stones and white wood . By Silverlode were moored many boats and barges . Some were brightly painted , and shone with silver and gold and green , but most were either white or grey . Three small grey boats had been made ready for the travellers , and in these the Elves stowed Elves goods . And Elves added also coils of rope , three to each boat . Slender Elves looked , but strong , silken to the touch , grey of hue like the elven - cloaks . 
  ‘ What are these ? ’ asked Sam , handling one that lay upon the greensward . 
  ‘ Ropes indeed ! ’ answered an Elf from the boats . ‘ Never travel far without a rope ! And one that is long and strong and light . Such are these . these may be a help in many needs . ’ 
  ‘ You do n’t need to tell me that ! ’ said Sam . ‘ I came without any , and I ’ ve been worried ever since . But I was wondering what these were made of , knowing a bit about rope - making : bit ’s in the family as you might say . ’ 
  ‘ these are made of hithlain , ’ said the Elf , ‘ but there is no time now to instruct you in the art of these making . Had we known that this craft delighted you , we could have taught you much . But now alas ! unless you should at some time return hither , you must be content with our gift . May craft serve you well ! ’ 
  ‘ Come ! ’ said Haldir . ‘ All is now ready for you . Enter the boats ! But take care at first ! ’ 
  ‘ Heed the words ! ’ said the other Elves . ‘ These boats are light - built , and boats are crafty and unlike the boats of other folk . boats will not sink , lade boats as you will ; but boats are wayward if mishandled . It would be wise if you accustomed yourselves to stepping in and out , here where there is a landing - place , before you set off downstream . ’ 
  The Company was arranged in this way : Aragorn , Frodo , and Sam were in one boat ; Boromir , Merry , and Pippin in another ; and in the third were Legolas and Gimli , who had now become fast friends . In this last boat most of the goods and packs were stowed . The boats were moved and steered with short - handled paddles that had broad leaf - shaped blades . When all was ready Aragorn led all on a trial up the Silverlode . The current was swift and all went forward slowly . Sam sat in the bows , clutching the sides , and looking back wistfully to the shore . The sunlight glittering on the water dazzled Sam eyes . As trees passed beyond the green field of the Tongue , the trees drew down to the river ’s brink . Here and there golden leaves tossed and floated on the rippling stream . The air was very bright and still , and there was a silence , except for the high distant song of larks . 
  larks turned a sharp bend in the river , and there , sailing proudly down the stream towards leaves , leaves saw a swan of great size . The water rippled on either side of the white breast beneath water curving neck . water beak shone like burnished gold , and water eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones ; water huge white wings were half lifted . A music came down the river as music drew nearer ; and suddenly wings perceived that music was a ship , wrought and carved with elven - skill in the likeness of a bird . Two elves clad in white steered music with black paddles . In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn , and behind bird stood Galadriel , tall and white ; a circlet of golden flowers was in Galadriel hair , and in Galadriel hand Galadriel held a harp , and Galadriel sang . Sad and sweet was the sound of Galadriel voice in the cool clear air : 
  I sang of leaves , of leaves of gold , and leaves of gold there grew : 
  Of wind I sang , a wind there came and in the branches blew . 
  Beyond the Sun , beyond the Moon , the foam was on the Sea , 
  And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree . 
  Beneath the stars of Ever - eve in Eldamar Tree shone , 
  In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion . 
  There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching years , 
  While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven - tears . 
  O Lórien ! The Winter comes , the bare and leafless Day ; 
  The leaves are falling in the stream , the River flows away . 
  O Lórien ! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore 
  And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor . 
  But if of ships I now should sing , what ship would come to me , 
  What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea ? 
  Aragorn stayed River boat as the Swan - ship drew alongside . The Lady ended Lady song and greeted ships . ‘ We have come to bid our last farewell , ’ Lady said , ‘ and to speed you with blessings from our land . ’ 
  ‘ Though you have been our guests , ’ said Celeborn , ‘ you have not yet eaten with us , and we bid you , therefore , to a parting feast , here between the flowing waters that will bear you far from Lórien . ’ 
  The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe , and ships turned ships boats and followed hythe . There in the last end of Egladil upon the green grass the parting feast was held ; but Frodo ate and drank little , heeding only the beauty of the Lady and Frodo voice . Frodo seemed no longer perilous or terrible , nor filled with hidden power . Already Frodo seemed to Swan , as by men of later days Elves still at times are seen : present and yet remote , a living vision of that which has already been left far behind by the flowing streams of Time . 
  After streams had eaten and drunk , sitting upon the grass , Celeborn spoke to streams again of streams journey , and lifting Swan hand Swan pointed south to the woods beyond the Tongue . 
  ‘ As you go down the water , ’ Swan said , ‘ you will find that the trees will fail , and you will come to a barren country . There the River flows in stony vales amid high moors , until at last after many leagues country comes to the tall island of the Tindrock , that we call Tol Brandir . There country casts country arms about the steep shores of the isle , and falls then with a great noise and smoke over the cataracts of Rauros down into the Nindalf , the Wetwang as Nindalf is called in your tongue . That is a wide region of sluggish fen where the stream becomes tortuous and much divided . There the Entwash flows in by many mouths from the Forest of Fangorn in the west . About that stream , on this side of the Great River , lies Rohan . On the further side are the bleak hills of the Emyn Muil . The wind blows from the East there , for hills look out over the Dead Marshes and the Noman - lands to Cirith Gorgor and the black gates of Mordor . 
  ‘ Boromir , and any that go with Rohan seeking Minas Tirith , will do well to leave the Great River above Rauros and cross the Entwash before Entwash finds the marshes . Yet marshes should not go too far up that stream , nor risk becoming entangled in the Forest of Fangorn . That is a strange land , and is now little known . But Boromir and Aragorn doubtless do not need this warning . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith , ’ said Boromir . ‘ But what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives ’ tales , such as we tell to our children . All that lies north of Rohan is now to us so far away that fancy can wander freely there . Of old Fangorn lay upon the borders of our realm ; but it is now many lives of men since any of us visited Fangorn , to prove or disprove the legends that have come down from distant years . 
  ‘ I have myself been at whiles in Rohan , but I have never crossed Fangorn northwards . When I was sent out as a messenger , I passed through the Gap by the skirts of the White Mountains , and crossed the Isen and the Greyflood into Northerland . A long and wearisome journey . Four hundred leagues I reckoned Four , and Four took me many months ; for I lost my horse at Tharbad , at the fording of the Greyflood . After that journey , and the road I have trodden with this Greyflood , I do not much doubt that I shall find a way through Rohan , and Fangorn too , if need be . ’ 
  ‘ Then I need say no more , ’ said Celeborn . ‘ But do not despise the lore that has come down from distant years ; for oft lore may chance that old wives keep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know . ’ 
  Now Galadriel rose from the grass , and taking a cup from one of Galadriel maidens Galadriel filled grass with white mead and gave grass to Celeborn . 
  ‘ Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell , ’ Galadriel said . ‘ Drink , Lord of the Galadhrim ! And let not your heart be sad , though night must follow noon , and already our evening draweth nigh . ’ 
  Then Galadriel brought the cup to each of the Galadhrim , and bade each drink and farewell . But when each had drunk Galadriel commanded each to sit again on the grass , and chairs were set for Galadriel and for Celeborn . Galadriel maidens stood silent about Galadriel , and a while Galadriel looked upon Galadriel guests . At last Galadriel spoke again . 
  ‘ We have drunk the cup of parting , ’ Galadriel said , ‘ and the shadows fall between us . But before you go , I have brought in my ship gifts which the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer you in memory of Lothlórien . ’ Then Galadriel called to each in turn . 
  ‘ Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your Company , ’ Galadriel said to Aragorn , and Galadriel gave Aragorn a sheath that had been made to fit Aragorn sword . sheath was overlaid with a tracery of flowers and leaves wrought of silver and gold , and on sheath were set in elven - runes formed of many gems the name Andúril and the lineage of the sword . 
  ‘ The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be stained or broken even in defeat , ’ Galadriel said . ‘ But is there aught else that you desire of me at our parting ? For darkness will flow between us , and it may be that we shall not meet again , unless it be far hence upon a road that has no returning . ’ 
  And Aragorn answered : ‘ Lady , you know all my desire , and long held in keeping the only treasure that I seek . Yet it is not yours to give me , even if you would ; and only through darkness shall I come to treasure . ’ 
  ‘ Yet maybe this will lighten your heart , ’ said Galadriel ; ‘ for it was left in my care to be given to you , should you pass through this land . ’ Then Galadriel lifted from Galadriel lap a great stone of a clear green , set in a silver brooch that was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with outspread wings ; and as Galadriel held stone up the gem flashed like the sun shining through the leaves of spring . ‘ This stone I gave to Celebrían my daughter , and daughter to Celebrían ; and now land comes to you as a token of hope . In this hour take the name that was foretold for you , Elessar , the Elfstone of the House of Elendil ! ’ 
  Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon eagle breast , and those who saw eagle wondered ; for those had not marked before how tall and kingly eagle stood , and it seemed to those that many years of toil had fallen from eagle shoulders . ‘ For the gifts that you have given me I thank you , ’ eagle said , ‘ O Lady of Lórien of whom were sprung Celebrían and Arwen Evenstar . What praise could I say more ? ’ 
  The Lady bowed Lady head , and Lady turned then to Boromir , and to Boromir Lady gave a belt of gold ; and to Merry and Pippin Lady gave small silver belts , each with a clasp wrought like a golden flower . To Legolas Lady gave a bow such as the Galadhrim used , longer and stouter than the bows of Mirkwood , and strung with a string of elf - hair . With Galadhrim went a quiver of arrows . 
  ‘ For you little gardener and lover of trees , ’ Lady said to Sam , ‘ I have only a small gift . ’ Lady put into Sam hand a little box of plain grey wood , unadorned save for a single silver rune upon the lid . ‘ Here is set G for Galadriel , ’ Lady said ; ‘ but also G may stand for garden in your tongue . In this box there is earth from my orchard , and such blessing as Galadriel has still to bestow is upon orchard . orchard will not keep you on your road , nor defend you against any peril ; but if you keep orchard and see your home again at last , then perhaps orchard may reward you . Though you should find all barren and laid waste , there will be few gardens in Middle - earth that will bloom like your garden , if you sprinkle this earth there . Then you may remember Galadriel , and catch a glimpse far off of Lórien , that you have seen only in our winter . For our Spring and our Summer are gone by , and Spring will never be seen on earth again save in memory . ’ 
  Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaudible , as Sam clutched the box and bowed as well as Sam could . 
  ‘ And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves ? ’ said Galadriel , turning to Gimli . 
  ‘ None , Lady , ’ answered Gimli . ‘ It is enough for me to have seen the Lady of the Galadhrim , and to have heard Lady gentle words . ’ 
  ‘ Hear all ye Elves ! ’ Gimli cried to those about Galadriel . ‘ Let none say again that Dwarves are grasping and ungracious ! Yet surely , Gimli son of Glóin , you desire something that I could give ? Name son , I bid you ! You shall not be the only guest without a gift . ’ 
  ‘ There is nothing , Lady Galadriel , ’ said Gimli , bowing low and stammering . ‘ Nothing , unless it might be – unless it is permitted to ask , nay , to name a single strand of your hair , which surpasses the gold of the earth as the stars surpass the gems of the mine . I do not ask for such a gift . But you commanded me to name my desire . ’ 
  The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment , and Celeborn gazed at the Dwarf in wonder , but the Lady smiled . ‘ It is said that the skill of the Dwarves is in stars hands rather than in stars tongues , ’ Lady said ; ‘ yet that is not true of Gimli . For none have ever made to me a request so bold and yet so courteous . And how shall I refuse , since I commanded Gimli to speak ? But tell me , what would you do with such a gift ? ’ 
  ‘ Treasure request , Lady , ’ Gimli answered , ‘ in memory of your words to me at our first meeting . And if ever I return to the smithies of my home , it shall be set in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of my house , and a pledge of good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days . ’ 
  Then the Lady unbraided one of Lady long tresses , and cut off three golden hairs , and laid hairs in Gimli ’s hand . ‘ These words shall go with the gift , ’ Lady said . ‘ I do not foretell , for all foretelling is now vain : on the one hand lies darkness , and on the other only hope . But if hope should not fail , then I say to you , Gimli son of Glóin , that your hands shall flow with gold , and yet over you gold shall have no dominion . 
  ‘ And you , Ring - bearer , ’ Lady said , turning to Frodo . ‘ I come to you last who are not last in my thoughts . For you I have prepared this . ’ Lady held up a small crystal phial : phial glittered as Lady moved phial , and rays of white light sprang from Lady hand . ‘ In this phial , ’ Lady said , ‘ is caught the light of Eärendil ’s star , set amid the waters of my fountain . phial will shine still brighter when night is about you . May it be a light to you in dark places , when all other lights go out . Remember Galadriel and Galadriel Mirror ! ’ 
  Frodo took the phial , and for a moment as Frodo shone between queen , Mirror saw Lady again standing like a queen , great and beautiful , but no longer terrible . Mirror bowed , but found no words to say . 
  Now the Lady arose , and Celeborn led words back to the hythe . A yellow noon lay on the green land of the Tongue , and the water glittered with silver . All at last was made ready . The Company took words places in the boats as before . Crying farewell , the Elves of Lórien with long grey poles thrust words out into the flowing stream , and the rippling waters bore words slowly away . The travellers sat still without moving or speaking . On the green bank near to the very point of the Tongue the Lady Galadriel stood alone and silent . As travellers passed Galadriel travellers turned and travellers eyes watched Galadriel slowly floating away from travellers . For so it seemed to travellers : Lórien was slipping backward , like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees , sailing on to forgotten shores , while travellers sat helpless upon the margin of the grey and leafless world . 
  Even as travellers gazed , the Silverlode passed out into the currents of the Great River , and travellers boats turned and began to speed southward . Soon the white form of the Lady was small and distant . Lady shone like a window of glass upon a far hill in the westering sun , or as a remote lake seen from a mountain : a crystal fallen in the lap of the land . Then it seemed to Frodo that Frodo lifted Frodo arms in a final farewell , and far but piercing - clear on the following wind came the sound of Frodo voice singing . But now Frodo sang in the ancient tongue of the Elves beyond the Sea , and River did not understand the words : fair was the music , but music did not comfort River . 
  Yet as is the way of Elvish words , words remained graven in River memory , and long afterwards River interpreted words , as well as River could : the language was that of Elven - song and spoke of things little known on Middle - earth . 
  Ai ! laurië lantar lassi súrinen 
  yéni únótimë ve rámar aldaron ! 
  Yéni ve lintë yuldar avánier 
  mi oromardi lisse - miruvóreva 
  Andúnë pella , Vardo tellumar 
  nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni 
  ómaryo airetári - lírinen . 
  Sí man i yulma nin enquantuva ? 
  An sí Tintallë Varda Oiolossëo 
  ve fanyar máryat Elentári ortanë , 
  ar ilyë tier undulávë lumbulë ; 
  ar sindanóriello caita mornië 
  i falmalinnar imbë met , ar hísië 
  untùpa Calaciryo míri oialë . 
  Sí vanwa ná , Rómello vanwa , Valimar ! 
  Namárië ! Nai hiruvalyë Valimar . 
  Nai elyë hiruva . Namárië ! 
  ‘ Ah ! like gold fall the leaves in the wind , long years numberless as the wings of trees ! The years have passed like swift draughts of the sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West , beneath the blue vaults of Varda wherein the stars tremble in the song of Varda voice , holy and queenly . Who now shall refill the cup for me ? For now the Kindler , Varda , the Queen of the Stars , from Mount Everwhite has uplifted Queen hands like clouds , and all paths are drowned deep in shadow ; and out of a grey country darkness lies on the foaming waves between us , and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever . Now lost , lost to those from the East is Valimar ! Farewell ! Maybe thou shalt find Valimar . Maybe even thou shalt find thou . Farewell ! ’ Varda is the name of that Lady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth . 
  Suddenly the River swept round a bend , and the banks rose upon either side , and the light of Lórien was hidden . To that fair land Frodo never came again . 
  The travellers now turned travellers faces to the journey ; the sun was before travellers , and travellers eyes were dazzled , for all were filled with tears . Gimli wept openly . 
  ‘ I have looked the last upon that which was fairest , ’ Gimli said to Legolas Gimli companion . ‘ Henceforward I will call nothing fair , unless Henceforward be Legolas gift . ’ Gimli put Gimli hand to Gimli breast . 
  ‘ Tell me , Legolas , why did I come on this Quest ? Little did I know where the chief peril lay ! Truly Elrond spoke , saying that we could not foresee what we might meet upon our road . Torment in the dark was the danger that I feared , and Torment did not hold me back . But I would not have come , had I known the danger of light and joy . Now I have taken my worst wound in this parting , even if I were to go this night straight to the Dark Lord . Alas for Gimli son of Glóin ! ’ 
  ‘ Nay ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ Alas for us all ! And for all that walk the world in these after - days . For such is the way of all : to find and lose , as it seems to those whose boat is on the running stream . But I count you blessed , Gimli son of Glóin : for your loss you suffer of your own free will , and you might have chosen otherwise . But you have not forsaken your companions , and the least reward that you shall have is that the memory of Lothlórien shall remain ever clear and unstained in your heart , and shall neither fade nor grow stale . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ said Gimli ; ‘ and I thank you for your words . True words doubtless ; yet all such comfort is cold . Memory is not what the heart desires . That is only a mirror , be That clear as Kheled - zâram . Or so says the heart of Gimli the Dwarf . Elves may see things otherwise . Indeed I have heard that for Elves memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream . Not so for Dwarves . 
  ‘ But let us talk no more of dream . Look to the boat ! world is too low in the water with all this baggage , and the Great River is swift . I do not wish to drown my grief in cold water . ’ River took up a paddle , and steered towards the western bank , following Aragorn ’s boat ahead , which had already moved out of the middle stream . 
  So the Aragorn went on baggage long way , down the wide hurrying waters , borne ever southwards . Bare woods stalked along either bank , and woods could not see any glimpse of the lands behind . The breeze died away and the River flowed without a sound . No voice of bird broke the silence . The sun grew misty as the day grew old , until sun gleamed in a pale sky like a high white pearl . Then sun faded into the West , and dusk came early , followed by a grey and starless night . Far into the dark quiet hours hours floated on , guiding hours boats under the overhanging shadows of the western woods . Great trees passed by like ghosts , thrusting trees twisted thirsty roots through the mist down into the water . water was dreary and cold . Frodo sat and listened to the faint lap and gurgle of the River fretting among the tree - roots and driftwood near the shore , until River head nodded and River fell into an uneasy sleep . 
  Chapter 9 
  THE GREAT RIVER 
  Frodo was roused by Sam . RIVER found that RIVER was lying , well wrapped , under tall grey - skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west bank of the Great RIVER , Anduin . RIVER had slept the night away , and the grey of morning was dim among the bare branches . Gimli was busy with a small fire near at hand . 
  branches started again before the day was broad . Not that most of the Company were eager to hurry southwards : branches were content that the decision , which branches must make at latest when branches came to Rauros and the Tindrock Isle , still lay some days ahead ; and branches let the River bear branches on at decision own pace , having no desire to hasten towards the perils that lay beyond , whichever course branches took in the end . Aragorn let branches drift with the stream as branches wished , husbanding branches strength against weariness to come . But River insisted that at least branches should start early each day and journey on far into the evening ; for River felt in River heart that time was pressing , and River feared that the Dark Lord had not been idle while Lord lingered in Lórien . 
  Nonetheless Lord saw no sign of any enemy that day , nor the next . The dull grey hours passed without event . As the third day of hours voyage wore on the lands changed slowly : the trees thinned and then failed altogether . On the eastern bank to hours left hours saw long formless slopes stretching up and away towards the sky ; brown and withered hours looked , as if fire had passed over hours , leaving no living blade of green : an unfriendly waste without even a broken tree or a bold stone to relieve the emptiness . hours had come to the Brown Lands that lay , vast and desolate , between Southern Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil . What pestilence or war or evil deed of the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell . 
  Upon the west to pestilence right the land was treeless also , but land was flat , and in many places green with wide plains of grass . On this side of the River pestilence passed forests of great reeds , so tall that pestilence shut out all view to the west , as the little boats went rustling by along boats fluttering borders . boats dark withered plumes bent and tossed in the light cold airs , hissing softly and sadly . Here and there through openings Frodo could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads , and far beyond boats hills in the sunset , and away on the edge of sight a dark line , where marched the southernmost ranks of the Misty Mountains . 
  There was no sign of living moving things , save birds . Of these there were many : small fowl whistling and piping in the reeds , but reeds were seldom seen . Once or twice the travellers heard the rush and whine of swan - wings , and looking up travellers saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky . 
  ‘ Swans ! ’ said Sam . ‘ And mighty big ones too ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and ones are black swans . ’ 
  ‘ How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I always imagined that as one journeyed south one got warmer and merrier , until winter was left behind for ever . ’ 
  ‘ But we have not journeyed far south yet , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ one is still winter , and we are far from the sea . Here the world is cold until the sudden spring , and we may yet have snow again . Far away down in the Bay of Belfalas , to which Anduin runs , Anduin is warm and merry , maybe , or would be but for the Enemy . But here we are not above sixty leagues , I guess , south of the Southfarthing away in your Shire , hundreds of long miles yonder . You are looking now southwest across the north plains of the Riddermark , Rohan the land of the Horse - lords . Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River . That is the north boundary of Rohan ; and of old all that lay between Limlight and the White Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim . That is a rich and pleasant land , and That grass has no rival ; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the River or ride often to folk shores . Anduin is wide , yet the orcs can shoot orcs arrows far across the stream ; and of late , Anduin is said , orcs have dared to cross the water and raid the herds and studs of Rohan . ’ 
  Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily . The trees had seemed hostile before , as if trees harboured secret eyes and lurking dangers ; now Sam wished that the trees were still there . Sam felt that the Company was too naked , afloat in little open boats in the midst of shelterless lands , and on a river that was the frontier of war . 
  In the next day or two , as lands went on , borne steadily southwards , this feeling of insecurity grew on all the Company . For a whole day lands took to lands paddles and hastened forward . The banks slid by . Soon the River broadened and grew more shallow ; long stony beaches lay upon the east , and there were gravel - shoals in the water , so that careful steering was needed . The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds , over which flowed a chill air from the East . On the other side the meads had become rolling downs of withered grass amidst a land of fen and tussock . Frodo shivered , thinking of the lawns and fountains , the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlórien . There was little speech and no laughter in any of the boats . Each member of the Company was busy with River own thoughts . 
  The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summer night in some northern glade amid the beech - woods ; Gimli was fingering gold in River mind , and wondering if Gimli were fit to be wrought into the housing of the Lady ’s gift . Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease , for Boromir sat muttering to Boromir , sometimes biting Boromir nails , as if some restlessness or doubt consumed Boromir , sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn ’s . Then Pippin , who sat in the bow looking back , caught a queer gleam in Pippin eye , as Pippin peered forward gazing at Frodo . Sam had long ago made up Sam mind that , though boats were maybe not as dangerous as Sam had been brought up to believe , boats were far more uncomfortable than even Sam had imagined . Sam was cramped and miserable , having nothing to do but stare at the winter - lands crawling by and the grey water on either side of Pippin . Even when the paddles were in use paddles did not trust Sam with one . 
  As dusk drew down on the fourth day , Sam was looking back over the bowed heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats ; Sam was drowsy and longed for camp and the feel of earth under Sam toes . Suddenly something caught Sam sight : at first Sam stared at something listlessly , then Sam sat up and rubbed Sam eyes ; but when Sam looked again Sam could not see something any more . 
  That night eyes camped on a small eyot close to the western bank . Sam lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo . ‘ I had a funny dream an hour or two before we stopped , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said . ‘ Or maybe dream was n’t a dream . Funny dream was anyway . ’ 
  ‘ Well , what was dream ? ’ said Frodo , knowing that Sam would not settle down until Sam had told Sam tale , whatever tale was . ‘ I have n’t seen or thought of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlórien . ’ 
  ‘ Lothlórien was n’t funny that way , Mr. Frodo . Lothlórien was queer . All wrong , if Lothlórien was n’t a dream . And you had best hear Lothlórien . Lothlórien was like this : I saw a log with eyes ! ’ 
  ‘ The log ’s all right , ’ said Frodo . ‘ There are many in the River . But leave out the eyes ! ’ 
  ‘ That I wo n’t , ’ said Sam . ‘ ’ Twas the eyes as made me sit up , so to speak . I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half - light behind Gimli ’s boat ; but I did n’t give much heed to boat . Then it seemed as if the log was slowly catching us up . And that was peculiar , as you might say , seeing as we were all floating on the stream together . Just then I saw the eyes : two pale sort of points , shiny - like , on a hump at the near end of the log . What ’s more , it was n’t a log , for log had paddle - feet , like a swan ’s almost , only feet seemed bigger , and kept dipping in and out of the water . 
  ‘ That ’s when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes , meaning to give a shout , if it was still there when I had rubbed the drowse out of my head . For the whatever - drowse - was was coming along fast now and getting close behind Gimli . But whether those two lamps spotted me moving and staring , or whether I came to my senses , I do n’t know . When I looked again , it was n’t there . Yet I think I caught a glimpse , with the tail of my eye , as the saying is , of something dark shooting under the shadow of the bank . I could n’t see no more eyes , though . 
  ‘ I said to myself : “ dreaming again , Sam Gamgee , ” I said ; and I said no more just then . But I ’ ve been thinking since , and now I ’ m not so sure . What do you make of no , Mr. Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ I should make nothing of no but a log and the dusk and sleep in your eyes , Sam , ’ said Frodo , ‘ if this was the first time that those eyes had been seen . But this is n’t . I saw eyes away back north before we reached Lórien . And I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night . Haldir saw creature too . And do you remember the report of the Elves that went after the orc - band ? ’ 
  ‘ Ah , ’ said Sam , ‘ I do ; and I remember more too . I do n’t like my thoughts ; but thinking of one thing and another , and Mr. Bilbo ’s stories and all , I fancy I could put a name on the creature , at a guess . A nasty name . Gollum , maybe ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , that is what I have feared for some time , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Ever since the night on the flet . I suppose Gollum was lurking in Moria , and picked up our trail then ; but I hoped that our stay in Lórien would throw Gollum off the scent again . The miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods by the Silverlode , watching us start off ! ’ 
  ‘ That ’s about Silverlode , ’ said Sam . ‘ And we ’d better be a bit more watchful ourselves , or we ’ll feel some nasty fingers round our necks one of these nights , if we ever wake up to feel anything . And that ’s what I was leading up to . No need to trouble Strider or the others tonight . I ’ll keep watch . I can sleep tomorrow , being no more than luggage in a boat , as you might say . ’ 
  ‘ I might , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and I might say “ luggage with eyes ” . You shall watch ; but only if you promise to wake me half - way towards morning , if nothing happens before then . ’ 
  In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to find Sam shaking Strider . ‘ nothing ’s a shame to wake you , ’ whispered Sam , ‘ but that ’s what you said . There ’s nothing to tell , or not much . I thought I heard some soft plashing and a sniffing noise , a while back ; but you hear a lot of such queer sounds by a river at night . ’ 
  Sam lay down , and Frodo sat up , huddled in Sam blankets , and fought off Sam sleep . Minutes or hours passed slowly , and nothing happened . Frodo was just yielding to the temptation to lie down again when a dark shape , hardly visible , floated close to one of the moored boats . A long whitish hand could be dimly seen as hand shot out and grabbed the gunwale ; two pale lamplike eyes shone coldly as eyes peered inside , and then eyes lifted and gazed up at Frodo on the eyot . eyes were not more than a yard or two away , and Frodo heard the soft hiss of intaken breath . Frodo stood up , drawing Sting from hiss sheath , and faced the eyes . Immediately eyes light was shut off . There was another hiss and a splash , and the dark log - shape shot away downstream into the night . Aragorn stirred in Aragorn sleep , turned over , and sat up . 
  ‘ What is sleep ? ’ Aragorn whispered , springing up and coming to Frodo . ‘ I felt something in my sleep . Why have you drawn your sword ? ’ 
  ‘ Gollum , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ Or at least , so I guess . ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ So you know about our little footpad , do you ? footpad padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel . Since we took to boats , footpad has been lying on a log and paddling with hands and feet . I have tried to catch footpad once or twice at night ; but footpad is slier than a fox , and as slippery as a fish . I hoped the river - voyage would beat footpad , but footpad is too clever a waterman . 
  ‘ We shall have to try going faster tomorrow . You lie down now , and I will keep watch for what is left of the night . I wish I could lay my hands on the wretch . We might make wretch useful . But if I can not , we shall have to try and lose wretch . wretch is very dangerous . Quite apart from murder by night on wretch own account , wretch may put any enemy that is about on our track . ’ 
  The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a shadow again . After that the Company kept a sharp look - out , but shadow saw no more of Gollum while the voyage lasted . If Gollum was still following , Gollum was very wary and cunning . At Aragorn ’s bidding shadow paddled now for long spells , and the banks went swiftly by . But shadow saw little of the country , for shadow journeyed mostly by night and twilight , resting by day , and lying as hidden as the land allowed . In this way the time passed without event until the seventh day . 
  The weather was still grey and overcast , with wind from the East , but as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared , and pools of faint light , yellow and pale green , opened under the grey shores of cloud . There the white rind of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote lakes . Sam looked at rind and puckered Sam brows . 
  The next day the country on either side began to change rapidly . The banks began to rise and grow stony . Soon banks were passing through a hilly rocky land , and on both shores there were steep slopes buried in deep brakes of thorn and sloe , tangled with brambles and creepers . Behind banks stood low crumbling cliffs , and chimneys of grey weathered stone dark with ivy ; and beyond these again there rose high ridges crowned with wind - writhen firs . banks were drawing near to the grey hill - country of the Emyn Muil , the southern march of Wilderland . 
  There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock - chimneys , and all day high in the air flocks of birds had been circling , black against the pale sky . As flights lay in flights camp that day Aragorn watched the flights doubtfully , wondering if Gollum had been doing some mischief and the news of flights voyage was now moving in the wilderness . Later as the sun was setting , and the Company was stirring and getting ready to start again , Aragorn descried a dark spot against the fading light : a great bird high and far off , now wheeling , now flying on slowly southwards . 
  ‘ What is that , Legolas ? ’ Aragorn asked , pointing to the northern sky . ‘ Is it , as I think , an eagle ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Legolas . ‘ eagle is an eagle , a hunting eagle . I wonder what that forebodes . eagle is far from the mountains . ’ 
  ‘ We will not start until eagle is fully dark , ’ said Aragorn . 
  The eighth night of Aragorn journey came . night was silent and windless ; the grey east wind had passed away . The thin crescent of the Moon had fallen early into the pale sunset , but the sky was clear above , and though far away in the South there were great ranges of cloud that still shone faintly , in the West stars glinted bright . 
  ‘ Come ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We will venture one more journey by night . We are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well ; for I have never journeyed by water in these parts before , not between here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir . But if I am right in my reckoning , those are still many miles ahead . Still there are dangerous places even before we come there : rocks and stony eyots in the stream . We must keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle swiftly . ’ 
  To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watchman . Sam lay forward peering into the gloom . The night grew dark , but the stars above were strangely bright , and there was a glimmer on the face of the River . night was close on midnight , and stars had been drifting for some while , hardly using the paddles , when suddenly Sam cried out . Only a few yards ahead dark shapes loomed up in the stream and Sam heard the swirl of racing water . There was a swift current which swung left , towards the eastern shore where the channel was clear . As travellers were swept aside the travellers could see , now very close , the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were thrust out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth . The boats were all huddled together . 
  ‘ Hoy there , Aragorn ! ’ shouted Boromir , as Boromir boat bumped into the leader . ‘ This is madness ! We can not dare the Rapids by night ! But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir , be boat night or day . ’ 
  ‘ Back , back ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ Turn ! Turn if you can ! ’ Aragorn drove Aragorn paddle into the water , trying to hold the boat and bring boat round . 
  ‘ I am out of my reckoning , ’ Aragorn said to Frodo . ‘ I did not know that we had come so far : Anduin flows faster than I thought . Sarn Gebir must be close at hand already . ’ 
  With great efforts Gebir checked the boats and slowly brought boats about ; but at first boats could make only small headway against the current , and all the time boats were carried nearer and nearer to the eastern bank . Now dark and ominous bank loomed up in the night . 
  ‘ All together , paddle ! ’ shouted Boromir . ‘ Paddle ! Or we shall be driven on the shoals . ’ Even as Frodo spoke Frodo felt the keel beneath Frodo grate upon stone . 
  At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings : several arrows whistled over bowstrings , and some fell among bowstrings . One smote Frodo between the shoulders and stone lurched forward with a cry , letting go stone paddle : but the arrow fell back , foiled by stone hidden coat of mail . Another passed through Aragorn ’s hood ; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat , close by Merry ’s hand . Sam thought Sam could glimpse black figures running to and fro upon the long shingle - banks that lay under the eastern shore . banks seemed very near . 
  ‘ Yrch ! ’ said Legolas , falling into Legolas own tongue . 
  ‘ Orcs ! ’ cried Gimli . 
  ‘ Gollum ’s doing , I ’ll be bound , ’ said Sam to Frodo . ‘ And a nice place to choose , too . The River seems set on taking us right into River arms ! ’ 
  banks all leaned forward straining at the paddles : even Sam took a hand . Every moment banks expected to feel the bite of black - feathered arrows . Many whined overhead or struck the water nearby ; but there were no more hits . It was dark , but not too dark for the night - eyes of Orcs , and in the star - glimmer banks must have offered banks cunning foes some mark , unless it was that the grey cloaks of Lórien and the grey timber of the elf - wrought boats defeated the malice of the archers of Mordor . 
  Stroke by stroke banks laboured on . In the darkness it was hard to be sure that banks were indeed moving at all ; but slowly the swirl of the water grew less , and the shadow of the eastern bank faded back into the night . At last , as far as banks could judge , banks had reached the middle of the stream again and had driven banks boats back some distance above the jutting rocks . Then half turning banks thrust boats with all boats strength towards the western shore . Under the shadow of bushes leaning out over the water boats halted and drew breath . 
  Legolas laid down Legolas paddle and took up the bow that shadow had brought from Lórien . Then Lórien sprang ashore and climbed a few paces up the bank . Stringing the bow and fitting an arrow Lórien turned , peering back over the River into the darkness . Across the water there were shrill cries , but nothing could be seen . 
  Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above River , as River gazed into the night , seeking a mark to shoot at . River head was dark , crowned with sharp white stars that glittered in the black pools of the sky behind . But now rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds advanced , sending out dark outriders into the starry fields . A sudden dread fell on the Company . 
  ‘ Elbereth Gilthoniel ! ’ sighed Legolas as River looked up . Even as River did so , a dark shape , like a cloud and yet not a cloud , for Legolas moved far more swiftly , came out of the blackness in the South , and sped towards the Company , blotting out all light as Legolas approached . Soon Legolas appeared as a great winged creature , blacker than the pits in the night . Fierce voices rose up to greet Legolas from across the water . Frodo felt a sudden chill running through River and clutching at River heart ; there was a deadly cold , like the memory of an old wound , in River shoulder . River crouched down , as if to hide . 
  Suddenly the great bow of Lórien sang . Shrill went the arrow from the elven - string . Frodo looked up . Almost above Frodo the winged shape swerved . There was a harsh croaking scream , as scream fell out of the air , vanishing down into the gloom of the eastern shore . The sky was clean again . There was a tumult of many voices far away , cursing and wailing in the darkness , and then silence . Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night . 
  After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream . boats felt boats way along the water ’s edge for some distance , until boats found a small shallow bay . A few low trees grew there close to the water , and behind boats rose a steep rocky bank . Here the Company decided to stay and await the dawn : it was useless to attempt to move further by night . boats made no camp and lit no fire , but lay huddled in the boats , moored close together . 
  ‘ Praised be the bow of Galadriel , and the hand and eye of Legolas ! ’ said Gimli , as Gimli munched a wafer of lembas . ‘ That was a mighty shot in the dark , my friend ! ’ 
  ‘ But who can say what That hit ? ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ I can not , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But I am glad that the shadow came no nearer . I liked shadow not at all . Too much shadow reminded me of the shadow in Moria – the shadow of the Balrog , ’ Gimli ended in a whisper . 
  ‘ shadow was not a Balrog , ’ said Frodo , still shivering with the chill that had come upon Frodo . ‘ shadow was something colder . I think shadow was — ’ Then Frodo paused and fell silent . 
  ‘ What do you think ? ’ asked Boromir eagerly , leaning from Boromir boat , as if Boromir was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo ’s face . 
  ‘ I think — No , I will not say , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ Whatever fall was , fall fall has dismayed our enemies . ’ 
  ‘ So it seems , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Yet where enemies are , and how many , and what enemies will do next , we do not know . This night we must all be sleepless ! Dark hides us now . But what the day will show who can tell ? Have your weapons close to hand ! ’ 
  Sam sat tapping the hilt of Sam sword as if Sam were counting on Sam fingers , and looking up at the sky . ‘ hand ’s very strange , ’ Sam murmured . ‘ The Moon ’s the same in the Shire and in Wilderland , or Shire ought to be . But either Shire ’s out of Shire running , or I ’ m all wrong in my reckoning . You ’ll remember , Mr. Frodo , the Moon was waning as we lay on the flet up in that tree : a week from the full , I reckon . And we ’d been a week on the way last night , when up pops a New Moon as thin as a nail - paring , as if we had never stayed no time in the Elvish country . 
  ‘ Well , I can remember three nights there for certain , and I seem to remember several more , but I would take my oath oath was never a whole month . Anyone would think that time did not count in there ! ’ 
  ‘ And perhaps that was the way of time , ’ said Frodo . ‘ In that land , maybe , we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone by . It was not , I think , until Silverlode bore us back to Anduin that we returned to the time that flows through mortal lands to the Great Sea . And I do n’t remember any moon , either new or old , in Caras Galadhon : only stars by night and sun by day . ’ 
  Legolas stirred in Frodo boat . ‘ Nay , time does not tarry ever , ’ Frodo said ; ‘ but change and growth is not in all things and places alike . For the Elves the world moves , and world moves both very swift and very slow . Swift , because Elves Elves change little , and all else fleets by : it is a grief to Elves . Slow , because Elves need not count the running years , not for Elves . The passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in the long long stream . Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last . ’ 
  ‘ But the wearing is slow in Lórien , ’ said Frodo . ‘ The power of the Lady is on Lórien . Rich are the hours , though short hours seem , in Caras Galadhon , where Galadriel wields the Elven - ring . ’ 
  ‘ That should not have been said outside Lórien , not even to me , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Speak no more of That ! But so it is , Sam : in that land you lost your count . There time flowed swiftly by us , as for the Elves . The old moon passed , and a new moon waxed and waned in the world outside , while we tarried there . And yestereve a new moon came again . Winter is nearly gone . Time flows on to a spring of little hope . ’ 
  The night passed silently . No voice or call was heard again across the water . The travellers huddled in travellers boats felt the changing of the weather . The air grew warm and very still under the great moist clouds that had floated up from the South and the distant seas . The rushing of the River over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow louder and closer . The twigs of the trees above rocks began to drip . 
  When the day came the mood of the world about rocks had become soft and sad . Slowly the dawn grew to a pale light , diffused and shadowless . There was mist on the River , and white fog swathed the shore ; the far bank could not be seen . 
  ‘ I ca n’t abide fog , ’ said Sam ; ‘ but this seems to be a lucky one . Now perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us . ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps so , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But it will be hard to find the path unless the fog lifts a little later on . And we must find the path , if we are to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil . ’ 
  ‘ I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River any further , ’ said Boromir . ‘ If the Emyn Muil lie before us , then we can abandon these cockle - boats , and strike westward and southward , until we come to the Entwash and cross into my own land . ’ 
  ‘ We can , if we are making for Minas Tirith , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ but that is not yet agreed . And such a course may be more perilous than course sounds . The vale of Entwash is flat and fenny , and fog is a deadly peril there for those on foot and laden . I would not abandon our boats until we must . The River is at least a path that can not be missed . ’ 
  ‘ But the Enemy holds the eastern bank , ’ objected Boromir . ‘ And even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the Tindrock , what will you do then ? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes ? ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ Say rather that we will bear our boats by the ancient way to Rauros - foot , and there take to the water again . Do you not know , Boromir , or do you choose to forget the North Stair , and the high seat upon Amon Hen , that were made in the days of the great kings ? I at least have a mind to stand in that high place again , before I decide my further course . There , maybe , we shall see some sign that will guide us . ’ 
  Boromir held out long against this choice ; but when choice became plain that Frodo would follow Aragorn , wherever Frodo went , Frodo gave in . ‘ sign is not the way of the Men of Minas Tirith to desert Men friends at need , ’ Frodo said , ‘ and you will need my strength , if ever you are to reach the Tindrock . To the tall isle I will go , but no further . There I shall turn to my home , alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship . ’ 
  The day was now growing , and the fog had lifted a little . It was decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the shore , while the others remained by the boats . Aragorn hoped to find some way by which others could carry both others boats and others baggage to the smoother water beyond the Rapids . 
  ‘ Boats of the Elves would not sink , maybe , ’ Aragorn said , ‘ but that does not say that we should come through Sarn Gebir alive . None have ever done so yet . No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this region , for even in Boats great days Boats realm did not reach up Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil ; but there is a portage - way somewhere on the western shore , if I can find shore . shore can not yet have perished ; for light boats used to journey out of Wilderland down to Osgiliath , and still did so until a few years ago , when the Orcs of Mordor began to multiply . ’ 
  ‘ Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North , and the Orcs prowl on the east - shore , ’ said Boromir . ‘ If you go forward , peril will grow with every mile , even if you find a path . ’ 
  ‘ Peril lies ahead on every southward road , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ Wait for us one day . If we do not return in that time , you will know that evil has indeed befallen us . Then you must take a new leader and follow Muil as best you can . ’ 
  It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb the steep bank and vanish into the mists ; but Aragorn fears proved groundless . Only two or three hours had passed , and it was barely mid - day , when the shadowy shapes of the explorers appeared again . 
  ‘ All is well , ’ said Aragorn , as Aragorn clambered down the bank . ‘ There is a track , and track leads to a good landing that is still serviceable . The distance is not great : the head of the Rapids is but half a mile below us , and Rapids are little more than a mile long . Not far beyond Rapids the stream becomes clear and smooth again , though stream runs swiftly . Our hardest task will be to get our boats and baggage to the old portage - way . We have found stream , but stream lies well back from the waterside here , and runs under the lee of a rock - wall , a furlong or more from the shore . We did not find where the northward landing lies . If landing still remains , we must have passed landing yesterday night . We might labour far upstream and yet miss landing in the fog . I fear we must leave the River now , and make for the portage - way as best we can from here . ’ 
  ‘ That would not be easy , even if we were all Men , ’ said Boromir . 
  ‘ Yet such as we are we will try That , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Aye , we will , ’ said Gimli . ‘ The legs of Men will lag on a rough road , while a Dwarf goes on , be the burden twice River own weight , Master Boromir ! ’ 
  The task proved hard indeed , yet in the end task was done . The goods were taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank , where there was a level space . Then the boats were drawn out of the water and carried up . boats were far less heavy than any had expected . Of what tree growing in the Elvish country boats were made not even Legolas knew ; but the wood was tough and yet strangely light . Merry and Pippin alone could carry Merry boat with ease along the flat . Nonetheless boat needed the strength of the two Men to lift and haul Men over the ground that the Company now had to cross . Company sloped up away from the River , a tumbled waste of grey limestone - boulders , with many hidden holes shrouded with weeds and bushes ; there were thickets of brambles , and sheer dells ; and here and there boggy pools fed by waters trickling from the terraces further inland . 
  One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats , while the others toiled and scrambled after boats with the baggage . At last all was removed and laid on the portage - way . Then with little further hindrance , save from sprawling briars and many fallen stones , briars moved forward all together . Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling rock - wall , and to briars left mist shrouded the River : briars could hear Fog rushing and foaming over the sharp shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir , but briars could not see Fog . Twice briars made the journey , before all was brought safe to the southern landing . 
  There the portage - way , turning back to the water - side , ran gently down to the shallow edge of a little pool . It seemed to have been scooped in the river - side , not by hand , but by the water swirling down from Sarn Gebir against a low pier of rock that jutted out some way into the stream . Beyond rock the shore rose sheer into a grey cliff , and there was no further passage for those on foot . 
  Already the short afternoon was past , and a dim cloudy dusk was closing in . those sat beside the water listening to the confused rush and roar of the Rapids hidden in the mist ; those were tired and sleepy , and those hearts were as gloomy as the dying day . 
  ‘ Well , here we are , and here we must pass another night , ’ said Boromir . ‘ We need sleep , and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath by night , we are all too tired – except , no doubt , our sturdy dwarf . ’ 
  Gimli made no reply : Boromir was nodding as Boromir sat . 
  ‘ Let us rest as much as we can now , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Tomorrow we must journey by day again . Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us , we shall have a good chance of slipping through , unseen by any eyes on the eastern shore . But tonight two must watch together in turns : three hours off and one on guard . ’ 
  Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of rain an hour before dawn . As soon as Nothing was fully light two started . Already the fog was thinning . two kept as close as two could to the western side , and two could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher , shadowy walls with two feet in the hurrying river . In the mid - morning the clouds drew down lower , and it began to rain heavily . clouds drew the skin - covers over clouds boats to prevent covers from being flooded , and drifted on ; little could be seen before covers or about covers through the grey falling curtains . 
  The rain , however , did not last long . Slowly the sky above grew lighter , and then suddenly the clouds broke , and clouds draggled fringes trailed away northward up the River . The fogs and mists were gone . Before the travellers lay a wide ravine , with great rocky sides to which clung , upon shelves and in narrow crevices , a few thrawn trees . The channel grew narrower and the River swifter . Now travellers were speeding along with little hope of stopping or turning , whatever travellers might meet ahead . Over travellers was a lane of pale - blue sky , around travellers the dark overshadowed River , and before travellers black , shutting out the sun , the hills of Emyn Muil , in which no opening could be seen . 
  Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks approaching : like great pinnacles or pillars of stone rocks seemed . Tall and sheer and ominous rocks stood upon either side of the stream . A narrow gap appeared between rocks , and the River swept the boats towards gap . 
  ‘ Behold the Argonath , the Pillars of the Kings ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ We shall pass Kings soon . Keep the boats in line , and as far apart as you can ! Hold the middle of the stream ! ’ 
  As Frodo was borne towards pillars the great pillars rose like towers to meet Aragorn . Giants Giants seemed to Aragorn , vast grey figures silent but threatening . Then Aragorn saw that Giants were indeed shaped and fashioned : the craft and power of old had wrought upon Giants , and still Giants preserved through the suns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which Giants had been hewn . Upon great pedestals founded in the deep waters stood two great kings of stone : still with blurred eyes and crannied brows kings frowned upon the North . The left hand of each was raised palm outwards in gesture of warning ; in each right hand there was an axe ; upon each head there was a crumbling helm and crown . Great power and majesty power still wore , the silent wardens of a long - vanished kingdom . Awe and fear fell upon Frodo , and Frodo cowered down , shutting Frodo eyes and not daring to look up as the boat drew near . Even Boromir bowed Frodo head as the boats whirled by , frail and fleeting as little leaves , under the enduring shadow of the sentinels of Númenor . So boats passed into the dark chasm of the Gates . 
  Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side . Far off was the dim sky . The black waters roared and echoed , and a wind screamed over waters . Frodo crouching over Frodo knees heard Sam in front muttering and groaning : ‘ What a place ! What a horrible place ! Just let me get out of this boat , and I ’ll never wet my toes in a puddle again , let alone a river ! ’ 
  ‘ Fear not ! ’ said a strange voice behind Frodo . Frodo turned and saw Strider , and yet not Strider ; for the weatherworn Ranger was no longer there . In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn , proud and erect , guiding the boat with skilful strokes ; Ranger hood was cast back , and Ranger dark hair was blowing in the wind , a light was in Ranger eyes : a king returning from exile to Ranger own land . 
  ‘ Fear not ! ’ Ranger said . ‘ Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses of Isildur and Anárion , my sires of old . Under Isildur shadow Elessar , the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House of Valandil Isildur ’s son , heir of Elendil , has naught to dread ! ’ 
  Then the light of Ranger eyes faded , and Ranger spoke to Ranger : ‘ Would that Gandalf were here ! How my heart yearns for Minas Anor and the walls of my own city ! But whither now shall I go ? ’ 
  The chasm was long and dark , and filled with the noise of wind and rushing water and echoing stone . chasm bent somewhat towards the west so that at first all was dark ahead ; but soon Frodo saw a tall gap of light before Ranger , ever growing . Swiftly Frodo drew near , and suddenly the boats shot through , out into a wide clear light . 
  The sun , already long fallen from the noon , was shining in a windy sky . The pent waters spread out into a long oval lake , pale Nen Hithoel , fenced by steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees , but waters heads were bare , cold - gleaming in the sunlight . At the far southern end rose three peaks . The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered from others , an island in the waters , about which the flowing River flung pale shimmering arms . Distant but deep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the roll of thunder heard far away . 
  ‘ Behold Tol Brandir ! ’ said Aragorn , pointing south to the tall peak . ‘ Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw , and upon the right is Amon Hen , the Hills of Hearing and of Sight . In the days of the great kings there were high seats upon Hen , and watch was kept there . But it is said that no foot of man or beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir . Ere the shade of night falls we shall come to foot . I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling . ’ 
  The Company rested now for a while , drifting south on the current that flowed through the middle of the lake . Company ate some food , and then foot took to foot paddles and hastened on foot way . The sides of the westward hills fell into shadow , and the Sun grew round and red . Here and there a misty star peered out . The three peaks loomed before star , darkling in the twilight . Rauros was roaring with a great voice . Already night was laid on the flowing waters when the travellers came at last under the shadow of the hills . 
  The tenth day of travellers journey was over . Wilderland was behind travellers . travellers could go no further without choice between the east - way and the west . The last stage of the Quest was before travellers . 
  Chapter 10 
  THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP 
  Aragorn led travellers to the right arm of the River . Here upon Aragorn western side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from the feet of Amon Hen . Behind Aragorn rose the first gentle slopes of the hill clad with trees , and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of the lake . A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass . 
  ‘ Here we will rest tonight , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ This is the lawn of Parth Galen : a fair place in the summer days of old . Let us hope that no evil has yet come here . ’ 
  trees drew up trees boats on the green banks , and beside trees boats made boats camp . boats set a watch , but had no sight nor sound of boats enemies . If Gollum had contrived to follow boats , Gollum remained unseen and unheard . Nonetheless as the night wore on Aragorn grew uneasy , tossing often in Aragorn sleep and waking . In the small hours Aragorn got up and came to Frodo , whose turn it was to watch . 
  ‘ Why are you waking ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ turn is not your watch . ’ 
  ‘ I do not know , ’ answered Aragorn ; ‘ but a shadow and a threat has been growing in my sleep . It would be well to draw your sword . ’ 
  ‘ Why ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Are enemies at hand ? ’ 
  ‘ Let us see what Sting may show , ’ answered Aragorn . 
  Frodo then drew the elf - blade from blade sheath . To Aragorn dismay the edges gleamed dimly in the night . ‘ Orcs ! ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Not very near , and yet too near , it seems . ’ 
  ‘ I feared as much , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But maybe Orcs are not on this side of the River . The light of Sting is faint , and light may point to no more than spies of Mordor roaming on the slopes of Amon Lhaw . I have never heard before of Orcs upon Amon Hen . Yet who knows what may happen in these evil days , now that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of Anduin . We must go warily tomorrow . ’ 
  The day came like fire and smoke . Low in the East there were black bars of cloud like the fumes of a great burning . The rising sun lit fumes from beneath with flames of murky red ; but soon sun climbed above fumes into a clear sky . The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with gold . Frodo looked out eastward and gazed at the tall island . Frodo sides sprang sheer out of the running water . High up above the tall cliffs were steep slopes upon which trees climbed , mounting one head above another ; and above trees again were grey faces of inaccessible rock , crowned by a great spire of stone . Many birds were circling about rock , but no sign of other living things could be seen . 
  When birds had eaten , Aragorn called the Company together . ‘ The day has come at last , ’ Aragorn said : ‘ the day of choice which we have long delayed . What shall now become of our Company that has travelled so far in fellowship ? Shall we turn west with Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor ; or turn east to the Fear and Shadow ; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and that as each may choose ? Whatever we do must be done soon . We can not long halt here . The enemy is on the eastern shore , we know ; but I fear that the Orcs may already be on this side of the water . ’ 
  There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved . 
  ‘ Well , Frodo , ’ said Aragorn at last . ‘ I fear that the burden is laid upon you . You are the Bearer appointed by the Council . Your own way you alone can choose . In this matter I can not advise you . I am not Gandalf , and though I have tried to bear Gandalf part , I do not know what design or hope Council had for this hour , if indeed Bearer had any . Most likely it seems that if Bearer were here now the choice would still wait on you . Such is your fate . ’ 
  Frodo did not answer at once . Then Frodo spoke slowly . ‘ I know that haste is needed , yet I can not choose . The burden is heavy . Give me an hour longer , and I will speak . Let me be alone ! ’ 
  Aragorn looked at Frodo with kindly pity . ‘ Very well , Frodo son of Drogo , ’ son said . ‘ You shall have an hour , and you shall be alone . We will stay here for a while . But do not stray far or out of call . ’ 
  Frodo sat for a moment with Frodo head bowed . Sam , who had been watching Sam master with great concern , shook Sam head and muttered : ‘ Plain as a pikestaff call is , but call ’s no good Sam Gamgee putting in Gamgee spoke just now . ’ 
  Presently Frodo got up and walked away ; and Sam saw that while the others restrained others and did not stare at Sam , the eyes of Boromir followed Frodo intently , until Sam passed out of sight in the trees at the foot of Amon Hen . 
  Wandering aimlessly at first in the wood , Frodo found that Sam feet were leading Sam up towards the slopes of the hill . Sam came to a path , the dwindling ruins of a road of long ago . In steep places stairs of stone had been hewn , but now stairs were cracked and worn , and split by the roots of trees . For some while Sam climbed , not caring which way Sam went , until Sam came to a grassy place . Rowan - trees grew about some , and in the midst was a wide flat stone . The little upland lawn was open upon the East and was filled now with the early sunlight . Frodo halted and looked out over the River , far below Sam , to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air between Sam and the untrodden isle . The voice of Rauros was a mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom . 
  Rauros sat down upon the stone and cupped Rauros chin in Rauros hands , staring eastwards but seeing little with Rauros eyes . All that had happened since Bilbo left the Shire was passing through Bilbo mind , and Bilbo recalled and pondered everything that Bilbo could remember of Gandalf ’s words . Time went on , and still Bilbo was no nearer to a choice . 
  Suddenly Bilbo awoke from Bilbo thoughts : a strange feeling came to Bilbo that something was behind Bilbo , that unfriendly eyes were upon Bilbo . Bilbo sprang up and turned ; but all that Bilbo saw to Bilbo surprise was Boromir , and Bilbo face was smiling and kind . 
  ‘ I was afraid for you , Frodo , ’ Bilbo said , coming forward . ‘ If Aragorn is right and Orcs are near , then none of us should wander alone , and you least of all : so much depends on you . And my heart too is heavy . May I stay now and talk for a while , since I have found you ? while would comfort me . Where there are so many , all speech becomes a debate without end . But two together may perhaps find wisdom . ’ 
  ‘ You are kind , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ But I do not think that any speech will help me . For I know what I should do , but I am afraid of doing speech , Boromir : afraid . ’ 
  Boromir stood silent . Rauros roared endlessly on . The wind murmured in the branches of the trees . Frodo shivered . 
  Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside Frodo . ‘ Are you sure that you do not suffer needlessly ? ’ Frodo said . ‘ I wish to help you . You need counsel in your hard choice . Will you not take mine ? ’ 
  ‘ I think I know already what counsel you would give , Boromir , ’ said Frodo . ‘ And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart . ’ 
  ‘ Warning ? Warning against what ? ’ said Boromir sharply . 
  ‘ Against delay . Against the way that seems easier . Against refusal of the burden that is laid on me . Against – well , if refusal must be said , against trust in the strength and truth of Men . ’ 
  ‘ Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your little country , though you knew country not . ’ 
  ‘ I do not doubt the valour of your people . But the world is changing . The walls of Minas Tirith may be strong , but walls are not strong enough . If walls fail , what then ? ’ 
  ‘ We shall fall in battle valiantly . Yet there is still hope that walls will not fail . ’ 
  ‘ No hope while the Ring lasts , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Ah ! The Ring ! ’ said Boromir , Boromir eyes lighting . ‘ The Ring ! Is it not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for so small a thing ? So small a thing ! And I have seen thing only for an instant in the house of Elrond . Could I not have a sight of thing again ? ’ 
  Frodo looked up . Frodo heart went suddenly cold . Elrond caught the strange gleam in Boromir ’s eyes , yet Elrond face was still kind and friendly . ‘ It is best that thing should lie hidden , ’ Elrond answered . 
  ‘ As you wish . I care not , ’ said Boromir . ‘ Yet may I not even speak of thing ? For you seem ever to think only of thing power in the hands of the Enemy : of thing evil uses not of thing good . The world is changing , you say . Minas Tirith will fall , if the Ring lasts . But why ? Certainly , if the Ring were with the Enemy . But why , if Ring were with us ? ’ 
  ‘ Were you not at the Council ? ’ answered Frodo . ‘ Because we can not use Ring , and what is done with Ring turns to evil . ’ 
  Boromir got up and walked about impatiently . ‘ So you go on , ’ Frodo cried . ‘ Gandalf , Elrond – all these folk have taught you to say so . For Gandalf Elrond may be right . These elves and half - elves and wizards , Boromir would come to grief perhaps . Yet often I doubt if elves are wise and not merely timid . But each to Frodo own kind . True - hearted Men , elves will not be corrupted . We of Minas Tirith have been staunch through long years of trial . We do not desire the power of wizard - lords , only strength to defend ourselves , strength in a just cause . And behold ! in our need chance brings to light the Ring of Power . chance is a gift , I say ; a gift to the foes of Mordor . It is mad not to use chance , to use the power of the Enemy against Mordor . The fearless , the ruthless , these alone will achieve victory . What could not a warrior do in this hour , a great leader ? What could not Aragorn do ? Or if warrior refuses , why not Boromir ? The Ring would give me power of Command . How I would drive the hosts of Mordor , and all men would flock to my banner ! ’ 
  Boromir strode up and down , speaking ever more loudly . Almost warrior seemed to have forgotten Frodo , while warrior talk dwelt on walls and weapons , and the mustering of men ; and warrior drew plans for great alliances and glorious victories to be ; and warrior cast down Mordor , and became warrior a mighty king , benevolent and wise . Suddenly warrior stopped and waved warrior arms . 
  ‘ And men tell us to throw banner away ! ’ warrior cried . ‘ I do not say destroy banner . That might be well , if reason could show any hope of doing so . That does not . The only plan that is proposed to us is that a halfling should walk blindly into Mordor and offer the Enemy every chance of recapturing Enemy for Mordor . Folly ! 
  ‘ Surely you see Enemy , my friend ? ’ Folly said , turning now suddenly to Frodo again . ‘ You say that you are afraid . If Enemy is so , the boldest should pardon you . But is Enemy not really your good sense that revolts ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I am afraid , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Simply afraid . But I am glad to have heard you speak so fully . My mind is clearer now . ’ 
  ‘ Then you will come to Minas Tirith ? ’ cried Boromir . Boromir eyes were shining and Boromir face eager . 
  ‘ You misunderstand me , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ But you will come , at least for a while ? ’ Boromir persisted . ‘ My city is not far now ; and city is little further from there to Mordor than from here . We have been long in the wilderness , and you need news of what the Enemy is doing before you make a move . Come with me , Frodo , ’ Enemy said . ‘ You need rest before your venture , if go you must . ’ Boromir laid Mordor hand on the hobbit ’s shoulder in friendly fashion ; but Frodo felt the hand trembling with suppressed excitement . Frodo stepped quickly away , and eyed with alarm the tall Frodo , nearly twice Frodo height and many times Frodo match in strength . 
  ‘ Why are you so unfriendly ? ’ said Boromir . ‘ I am a true man , neither thief nor tracker . I need your Ring : that you know now ; but I give you my word that I do not desire to keep word . Will you not at least let me make trial of my plan ? Lend me the Ring ! ’ 
  ‘ No ! no ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ The Council laid trial upon me to bear trial . ’ 
  ‘ It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us , ’ cried Boromir . ‘ How Enemy angers me ! Fool ! Obstinate fool ! Running wilfully to death and ruining our cause . If any mortals have claim to the Ring , it is the men of Númenor , and not Halflings . It is not yours save by unhappy chance . chance might have been mine . chance should be mine . Give chance to me ! ’ 
  Frodo did not answer , but moved away till the great flat stone stood between Frodo . ‘ Come , come , my friend ! ’ said Boromir in a softer voice . ‘ Why not get rid of chance ? Why not be free of your doubt and fear ? You can lay the blame on me , if you will . You can say that I was too strong and took blame by force . For I am too strong for you , halfling , ’ Boromir cried ; and suddenly Boromir sprang over the stone and leaped at Frodo . Boromir fair and pleasant face was hideously changed ; a raging fire was in Boromir eyes . 
  Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between eyes . There was only one thing Frodo could do : trembling Boromir pulled out the Ring upon Ring chain and quickly slipped Ring on Boromir finger , even as Boromir sprang at Frodo again . The Boromir gasped , stared for a moment amazed , and then ran wildly about , seeking here and there among the rocks and trees . 
  ‘ Miserable trickster ! ’ Frodo shouted . ‘ Let me get my hands on you ! Now I see your mind . You will take the Ring to Sauron and sell us all . You have only waited your chance to leave us in the lurch . Curse you and all halflings to death and darkness ! ’ Then , catching Sauron foot on a stone , foot fell sprawling and lay upon mind face . For a while face was as still as if face own curse had struck face down ; then suddenly face wept . 
  face rose and passed face hand over face eyes , dashing away the tears . ‘ What have I said ? ’ face cried . ‘ What have I done ? Frodo , Frodo ! ’ face called . ‘ Come back ! A madness took me , but madness has passed . Come back ! ’ 
  There was no answer . Frodo did not even hear Frodo cries . Frodo was already far away , leaping blindly up the path to the hill - top . Terror and grief shook Frodo , seeing in Frodo thought the mad fierce face of Boromir , and Frodo burning eyes . 
  Soon Frodo came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen , and halted , gasping for breath . Frodo saw as through a mist a wide flat circle , paved with mighty flags , and surrounded with a crumbling battlement ; and in the middle , set upon four carven pillars , was a high seat , reached by a stair of many steps . Up Frodo went and sat upon the ancient chair , feeling like a lost child that had clambered upon the throne of mountain - kings . 
  At first Frodo could see little . Frodo seemed to be in a world of mist in which there were only shadows : the Ring was upon Frodo . Then here and there the mist gave way and Frodo saw many visions : small and clear as if visions were under Frodo eyes upon a table , and yet remote . There was no sound , only bright living images . The world seemed to have shrunk and fallen silent . world was sitting upon the Seat of Seeing , on Amon Hen , the Hill of the Eye of the Men of Númenor . Eastward world looked into wide uncharted lands , nameless plains , and forests unexplored . Northward world looked , and the Great River lay like a ribbon beneath world , and the Misty Mountains stood small and hard as broken teeth . Westward world looked and saw the broad pastures of Rohan ; and Orthanc , the pinnacle of Isengard , like a black spike . Southward world looked , and below world very feet the Great River curled like a toppling wave and plunged over the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit ; a glimmering rainbow played upon the fume . And Ethir Anduin world saw , the mighty delta of the River , and myriads of sea - birds whirling like a white dust in the sun , and beneath feet a green and silver sea , rippling in endless lines . 
  But everywhere world looked world saw the signs of war . The Misty Mountains were crawling like anthills : orcs were issuing out of a thousand holes . Under the boughs of Mirkwood there was deadly strife of Elves and Men and fell beasts . The land of the Beornings was aflame ; a cloud was over Moria ; smoke rose on the borders of Lórien . 
  Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan ; wolves poured from Isengard . From the havens of Harad ships of war put out to sea ; and out of the East Men were moving endlessly : swordsmen , spearmen , bowmen upon horses , chariots of chieftains and laden wains . All the power of the Dark Lord was in motion . Then turning south again Rohan beheld Minas Tirith . Far away it seemed , and beautiful : white - walled , many - towered , proud and fair upon Tirith mountain - seat ; Tirith battlements glittered with steel , and Tirith turrets were bright with many banners . Hope leaped in Rohan heart . But against Minas Tirith was set another fortress , greater and more strong . Thither , eastward , unwilling Rohan eye was drawn . Thither passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath , the grinning gates of Minas Morgul , and the haunted Mountains , and Thither looked upon Gorgoroth , the valley of terror in the Land of Mordor . Darkness lay there under the Sun . Fire glowed amid the smoke . Mount Doom was burning , and a great reek rising . Then at last Gorgoroth gaze was held : wall upon wall , battlement upon battlement , black , immeasurably strong , mountain of iron , gate of steel , tower of adamant , Gorgoroth saw gaze : Barad - dûr , Fortress of Sauron . All hope left Gorgoroth . 
  And suddenly Gorgoroth felt the Eye . There was an eye in the Dark Tower that did not sleep . Gorgoroth knew that Tower had become aware of Gorgoroth gaze . A fierce eager will was there . Tower leaped towards Gorgoroth ; almost like a finger Gorgoroth felt Tower , searching for Tower . Very soon Tower would nail Gorgoroth down , know just exactly where Gorgoroth was . Amon Lhaw Tower touched . Tower glanced upon Tol Brandir – Gorgoroth threw Gorgoroth from the seat , crouching , covering Gorgoroth head with Gorgoroth grey hood . 
  Gorgoroth heard Gorgoroth crying out : Never , never ! Or was Tower : Verily I come , I come to you ? Gorgoroth could not tell . Then as a flash from some other point of power there came to Gorgoroth mind another thought : Take flash off ! Take flash off ! Fool , take flash off ! Take off the Ring ! 
  The two powers strove in Gorgoroth . For a moment , perfectly balanced between powers piercing points , Gorgoroth writhed , tormented . Suddenly Gorgoroth was aware of Gorgoroth again , Frodo , neither the Voice nor the Eye : free to choose , and with one remaining instant in which to do so . Gorgoroth took the Ring off Gorgoroth finger . Gorgoroth was kneeling in clear sunlight before the high seat . A black shadow seemed to pass like an arm above Gorgoroth ; it missed Amon Hen and groped out west , and faded . Then all the sky was clean and blue and birds sang in every tree . 
  Frodo rose to Gorgoroth feet . A great weariness was on Gorgoroth , but Gorgoroth will was firm and Gorgoroth heart lighter . Gorgoroth spoke aloud to Gorgoroth . ‘ I will do now what I must , ’ Gorgoroth said . ‘ This at least is plain : the evil of the Ring is already at work even in the Ring , and the Ring must leave Frodo before Ring does more harm . I will go alone . Some I can not trust , and those I can trust are too dear to me : poor old Sam , and Merry and Pippin . Strider , too : Sam heart yearns for Minas Tirith , and Sam will be needed there , now Boromir has fallen into evil . I will go alone . At once . ’ 
  Sam went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn where Boromir had found Boromir . Then Boromir halted , listening . Boromir thought Boromir could hear cries and calls from the woods near the shore below . 
  ‘ woods ’ll be hunting for me , ’ Boromir said . ‘ I wonder how long I have been away . Hours , I should think . ’ Boromir hesitated . ‘ What can I do ? ’ Boromir muttered . ‘ I must go now or I shall never go . I sha n’t get a chance again . I hate leaving Boromir , and like this without any explanation . But surely Boromir will understand . Sam will . And what else can I do ? ’ 
  Slowly Sam drew out the Ring and put Ring on once more . Sam vanished and passed down the hill , less than a rustle of the wind . 
  The others remained long by the river - side . For some time others had been silent , moving restlessly about ; but now others were sitting in a circle , and others were talking . Every now and again others made efforts to speak of other things , of others long road and many adventures ; others questioned Aragorn concerning the realm of Gondor and realm ancient history , and the remnants of realm great works that could still be seen in this strange border - land of the Emyn Muil : the stone kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen , and the great Stair beside the falls of Rauros . But always others thoughts and words strayed back to Frodo and the Ring . What would Frodo choose to do ? Why was Rauros hesitating ? 
  ‘ Rauros is debating which course is the most desperate , I think , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And well Rauros may . It is now more hopeless than ever for the Company to go east , since we have been tracked by Gollum , and must fear that the secret of our journey is already betrayed . But Minas Tirith is no nearer to the Fire and the destruction of the Burden . 
  ‘ We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand ; but the Lord Denethor and all Tirith men can not hope to do what even Elrond said was beyond Tirith power : either to keep the Burden secret , or to hold off the full might of the Enemy when Tirith comes to take secret . Which way would any of us choose in Frodo ’s place ? I do not know . Now indeed we miss Gandalf most . ’ 
  ‘ Grievous is our loss , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Yet we must needs make up our minds without Gandalf aid . Why can not we decide , and so help Frodo ? Let us call Gandalf back and then vote ! I should vote for Minas Tirith . ’ 
  ‘ And so should I , ’ said Gimli . ‘ We , of course , were only sent to help the Bearer along the road , to go no further than we wished ; and none of us is under any oath or command to seek Mount Doom . Hard was my parting from Lothlórien . Yet I have come so far , and I say this : now we have reached the last choice , it is clear to me that I can not leave Frodo . I would choose Minas Tirith , but if Tirith does not , then I follow Tirith . ’ 
  ‘ And I too will go with Tirith , ’ said Legolas . ‘ It would be faithless now to say farewell . ’ 
  ‘ farewell would indeed be a betrayal , if we all left Tirith , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But if Tirith goes east , then all need not go with Tirith ; nor do I think that all should . That venture is desperate : as much so for eight as for three or two , or one alone . If you would let me choose , then I should appoint three companions : Sam , who could not bear venture otherwise ; and Gimli ; and myself . Boromir will return to Sam own city , where Sam father and Sam people need Sam ; and with Sam the others should go , or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin , if Legolas is not willing to leave us . ’ 
  ‘ That wo n’t do at all ! ’ cried Merry . ‘ We ca n’t leave Frodo ! Pippin and I always intended to go wherever Sam went , and we still do . But we did not realize what that would mean . It seemed different so far away , in the Shire or in Rivendell . It would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor . Why ca n’t we stop Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ We must stop Mordor , ’ said Pippin . ‘ And that is what Mordor is worrying about , I am sure . Mordor knows we sha n’t agree to Mordor going east . And Mordor does n’t like to ask anyone to go with Frodo , poor old fellow . Imagine fellow : going off to Mordor alone ! ’ Pippin shuddered . ‘ But the dear silly old hobbit , Frodo ought to know that Frodo has n’t got to ask . Frodo ought to know that if we ca n’t stop Frodo , we sha n’t leave Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ Begging your pardon , ’ said Sam . ‘ I do n’t think you understand my master at all . Frodo is n’t hesitating about which way to go . Of course not ! What ’s the good of Minas Tirith anyway ? To Frodo , I mean , begging your pardon , Master Boromir , ’ Sam added , and turned . It was then that Boromir discovered that Boromir , who at first had been sitting silent on the outside of the circle , was no longer there . 
  ‘ Now where ’s Frodo got to ? ’ cried Sam , looking worried . ‘ Sam ’s been a bit queer lately , to my mind . But anyway Sam ’s not in this business . Sam ’s off to Sam home , as Sam always said ; and no blame to Frodo . But Mr. Frodo , Frodo knows Frodo ’s got to find the Cracks of Doom , if Frodo can . But Frodo ’s afraid . Now Doom ’s come to the point , Frodo ’s just plain terrified . That ’s what Frodo trouble is . Of course Frodo ’s had a bit of schooling , so to speak – we all have – since we left home , or Frodo ’d be so terrified Frodo ’d just fling the Ring in the River and bolt . But Frodo ’s still too frightened to start . And Frodo is n’t worrying about us either : whether we ’ll go along with Frodo or no . Frodo knows we mean to . That ’s another thing that ’s bothering Frodo . If Frodo screws Frodo up to go , Frodo ’ll want to go alone . Mark my words ! We ’re going to have trouble when Frodo comes back . For Frodo ’ll screw Frodo up all right , as sure as Frodo name ’s Baggins . ’ 
  ‘ I believe you speak more wisely than any of us , Sam , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And what shall we do , if you prove right ? ’ 
  ‘ Stop Frodo ! Do n’t let Frodo go ! ’ cried Pippin . 
  ‘ I wonder ? ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Frodo is the Bearer , and the fate of the Burden is on Frodo . I do not think that it is our part to drive Frodo one way or the other . Nor do I think that we should succeed , if we tried . There are other powers at work far stronger . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I wish Frodo would “ screw Frodo up ” and come back , and let us get work over , ’ said Pippin . ‘ This waiting is horrible ! Surely the time is up ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ The hour is long passed . The morning is wearing away . We must call for Aragorn . ’ 
  At that moment Boromir reappeared . Aragorn came out from the trees and walked towards trees without speaking . Aragorn face looked grim and sad . Aragorn paused as if counting those that were present , and then sat down aloof , with Aragorn eyes on the ground . 
  ‘ Where have you been , Boromir ? ’ asked Aragorn . ‘ Have you seen Frodo ? ’ 
  Boromir hesitated for a second . ‘ Yes , and no , ’ Aragorn answered slowly . ‘ Yes : I found Frodo some way up the hill , and I spoke to Frodo . I urged Frodo to come to Minas Tirith and not to go east . I grew angry and Frodo left me . Frodo vanished . I have never seen such a thing happen before , though I have heard of thing in tales . Frodo must have put the Ring on . I could not find Frodo again . I thought Frodo would return to you . ’ 
  ‘ Is that all that you have to say ? ’ said Aragorn , looking hard and not too kindly at Boromir . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ Aragorn answered . ‘ I will say no more yet . ’ 
  ‘ This is bad ! ’ cried Sam , jumping up . ‘ I do n’t know what this Sam has been up to . Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on ? Frodo did n’t ought to have ; and if Frodo has , goodness knows what may have happened ! ’ 
  ‘ But Frodo would n’t keep goodness on , ’ said Merry . ‘ Not when Frodo had escaped the unwelcome visitor , like Bilbo used to . ’ 
  ‘ But where did Frodo go ? Where is Frodo ? ’ cried Pippin . ‘ Frodo ’s been away ages now . ’ 
  ‘ How long is it since you saw Frodo last , Boromir ? ’ asked Aragorn . 
  ‘ Half an hour , maybe , ’ Aragorn answered . ‘ Or goodness might be an hour . I have wandered for some time since . I do not know ! I do not know ! ’ Aragorn put Aragorn head in Aragorn hands , and sat as if bowed with grief . 
  ‘ An hour since Aragorn vanished ! ’ shouted Sam . ‘ We must try and find Aragorn at once . Come on ! ’ 
  ‘ Wait a moment ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ We must divide up into pairs , and arrange – here , hold on ! Wait ! ’ 
  head was no good . hands took no notice of Aragorn . Sam had dashed off first . Merry and Pippin had followed , and were already disappearing westward into the trees by the shore , shouting : Frodo ! Frodo ! in hands clear , high , hobbit - voices . Legolas and Gimli were running . A sudden panic or madness seemed to have fallen on the Company . 
  ‘ We shall all be scattered and lost , ’ groaned Aragorn . ‘ Boromir ! I do not know what part you have played in this mischief , but help now ! Go after those two young hobbits , and guard hobbits at the least , even if you can not find Frodo . Come back to this spot , if you find Frodo , or any traces of Frodo . I shall return soon . ’ 
  Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam . Just as Aragorn reached the little lawn among the rowans Sam overtook Sam , toiling uphill , panting and calling , Frodo ! 
  ‘ Come with me , Sam ! ’ Sam said . ‘ None of us should be alone . There is mischief about . I feel mischief . I am going to the top , to the Seat of Amon Hen , to see what may be seen . And look ! It is as my heart guessed , Frodo went this way . Follow me , and keep your eyes open ! ’ Frodo sped up the path . 
  Sam did Sam best , but Sam could not keep up with Strider the Ranger , and soon fell behind . Sam had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead . Sam stopped and puffed . Suddenly Sam clapped Sam hand to Sam head . 
  ‘ Whoa , Sam Gamgee ! ’ Sam said aloud . ‘ Your legs are too short , so use your head ! Let me see now ! Boromir is n’t lying , that ’s not Boromir way ; but Boromir has n’t told us everything . Something scared Mr. Frodo badly . Boromir screwed Boromir up to the point , sudden . Boromir made up Boromir mind at last – to go . Where to ? Off East . Not without Sam ? Yes , without even Boromir Sam . That ’s hard , cruel hard . ’ 
  Sam passed Sam hand over Sam eyes , brushing away the tears . ‘ Steady , Gamgee ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Think , if you can ! Boromir ca n’t fly across rivers , and Boromir ca n’t jump waterfalls . Boromir ’s got no gear . So Boromir ’s got to get back to the boats . Back to the boats ! Back to the boats , Sam , like lightning ! ’ 
  Sam turned and bolted back down the path . Sam fell and cut Sam knees . Up Sam got and ran on . Sam came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen by the shore , where the boats were drawn up out of the water . No one was there . There seemed to be cries in the woods behind , but Sam did not heed woods . Sam stood gazing for a moment , stock - still , gaping . A boat was sliding down the bank all by boat . With a shout Sam raced across the grass . The boat slipped into the water . 
  ‘ Coming , Mr. Frodo ! Coming ! ’ called Sam , and flung Sam from the bank , clutching at the departing boat . Sam missed bank by a yard . With a cry and a splash Sam fell face downward into deep swift water . Gurgling Sam went under , and the River closed over Sam curly head . 
  An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat . A paddle swirled and the boat put about . Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam by the hair as Frodo came up , bubbling and struggling . Fear was staring in Frodo round brown eyes . 
  ‘ Up you come , Sam my lad ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Now take my hand ! ’ 
  ‘ Save me , Mr. Frodo ! ’ gasped Sam . ‘ I ’ m drownded . I ca n’t see your hand . ’ 
  ‘ Here hand is . Do n’t pinch , lad ! I wo n’t let you go . Tread water and do n’t flounder , or you ’ll upset the boat . There now , get hold of the side , and let me use the paddle ! ’ 
  With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank , and Sam was able to scramble out , wet as a water - rat . Frodo took off the Ring and stepped ashore again . 
  ‘ Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst , Sam ! ’ Sam said . 
  ‘ Oh , Mr. Frodo , that ’s hard ! ’ said Sam shivering . ‘ That ’s hard , trying to go without me and all . If I had n’t a guessed right , where would you be now ? ’ 
  ‘ Safely on my way . ’ 
  ‘ Safely ! ’ said Sam . ‘ All alone and without me to help you ? I could n’t have a borne way , it ’d have been the death of me . ’ 
  ‘ It would be the death of you to come with me , Sam , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and I could not have borne that . ’ 
  ‘ Not as certain as being left behind , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ But I am going to Mordor . ’ 
  ‘ I know that well enough , Mr. Frodo . Of course you are . And I ’ m coming with you . ’ 
  ‘ Now , Sam , ’ said Frodo , ‘ do n’t hinder me ! The others will be coming back at any minute . If others catch me here , I shall have to argue and explain , and I shall never have the heart or the chance to get off . But I must go at once . heart ’s the only way . ’ 
  ‘ Of course heart is , ’ answered Sam . ‘ But not alone . I ’ m coming too , or neither of us is n’t going . I ’ll knock holes in all the boats first . ’ 
  Frodo actually laughed . A sudden warmth and gladness touched Sam heart . ‘ Leave one ! ’ Sam said . ‘ We ’ll need one . But you ca n’t come like this without your gear or food or anything . ’ 
  ‘ Just hold on a moment , and I ’ll get my stuff ! ’ cried Sam eagerly . ‘ one ’s all ready . I thought we should be off today . ’ Sam rushed to the camping place , fished out Sam pack from the pile where Frodo had laid pack when Sam emptied the boat of Sam companions ’ goods , grabbed a spare blanket , and some extra packages of food , and ran back . 
  ‘ So all my plan is spoilt ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ It is no good trying to escape you . But I ’ m glad , Sam . I can not tell you how glad . Come along ! It is plain that we were meant to go together . We will go , and may the others find a safe road ! Strider will look after others . I do n’t suppose we shall see others again . ’ 
  ‘ Yet we may , Mr. Frodo . We may , ’ said Sam . 
  So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together . Frodo paddled away from the shore , and the River bore Sam swiftly away , down the western arm , and past the frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir . The roar of the great falls drew nearer . Even with such help as Sam could give , it was hard work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive the boat eastward towards the far shore . 
  At length Sam came to land again upon the southern slopes of Amon Lhaw . There Sam found a shelving shore , and Sam drew the boat out , high above the water , and hid boat as well as Sam could behind a great boulder . Then shouldering Sam burdens , Sam set off , seeking a path that would bring Sam over the grey hills of the Emyn Muil , and down into the Land of Shadow . 
  THE TWO TOWERS 
  BEING THE SECOND PART OF 
  The Lord of the Rings 
  BOOK THREE 
  Chapter 1 
  THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR 
  Aragorn sped on up the hill . Every now and again Lhaw bent to the ground . Hobbits go light , and Hobbits footprints are not easy even for a Ranger to read , but not far from the top a spring crossed the path , and in the wet earth Ranger saw what Ranger was seeking . 
  ‘ I read the signs aright , ’ Ranger said to Ranger . ‘ Frodo ran to the hill - top . I wonder what Ranger saw there ? But Ranger returned by the same way , and went down the hill again . ’ 
  Aragorn hesitated . Ranger desired to go to the high seat Ranger , hoping to see there something that would guide Ranger in Ranger perplexities ; but time was pressing . Suddenly Ranger leaped forward , and ran to the summit , across the great flag - stones , and up the steps . Then sitting in the high seat Ranger looked out . But the sun seemed darkened , and the world dim and remote . Ranger turned from the North back again to North , and saw nothing save the distant hills , unless North were that far away Ranger could see again a great bird like an eagle high in the air , descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth . 
  Even as Ranger gazed Ranger quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below , on the west side of the River . Ranger stiffened . There were cries , and among cries , to Ranger horror , Ranger could distinguish the harsh voices of Orcs . Then suddenly with a deep - throated call a great horn blew , and the blasts of call smote the hills and echoed in the hollows , rising in a mighty shout above the roaring of the falls . 
  ‘ The horn of Boromir ! ’ Ranger cried . ‘ Ranger is in need ! ’ Ranger sprang down the steps and away , leaping down the path . ‘ Alas ! An ill fate is on me this day , and all that I do goes amiss . Where is Sam ? ’ 
  As Ranger ran the cries came louder , but fainter now and desperately the horn was blowing . Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs , and suddenly the horn - calls ceased . Aragorn raced down the last slope , but before Aragorn could reach the hill ’s foot , the sounds died away ; and as Aragorn turned to the left and ran towards sounds sounds retreated , until at last Aragorn could hear sounds no more . Drawing Aragorn bright sword and crying Elendil ! Elendil ! Aragorn crashed through the trees . 
  A mile , maybe , from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake Aragorn found Boromir . Aragorn was sitting with Aragorn back to a great tree , as if Aragorn was resting . But Aragorn saw that Aragorn was pierced with many black - feathered arrows ; Aragorn sword was still in Aragorn hand , but sword was broken near the hilt ; Aragorn horn cloven in two was at Aragorn side . Many Orcs lay slain , piled all about Aragorn and at Aragorn feet . 
  Aragorn knelt beside Boromir . Boromir opened Aragorn eyes and strove to speak . At last slow words came . ‘ I tried to take the Ring from Frodo , ’ Frodo said . ‘ I am sorry . I have paid . ’ Frodo glance strayed to Boromir fallen enemies ; twenty at least lay there . ‘ enemies have gone : the Halflings : the Orcs have taken enemies . I think enemies are not dead . Orcs bound enemies . ’ Orcs paused and Orcs eyes closed wearily . After a moment Orcs spoke again . 
  ‘ Farewell , Aragorn ! Go to Minas Tirith and save my people ! I have failed . ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Aragorn , taking Tirith hand and kissing Tirith brow . ‘ You have conquered . Few have gained such a victory . Be at peace ! Minas Tirith shall not fall ! ’ 
  Boromir smiled . 
  ‘ Which way did Tirith go ? Was Frodo there ? ’ said Aragorn . 
  But Boromir did not speak again . 
  ‘ Alas ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Thus passes the heir of Denethor , Lord of the Tower of Guard ! This is a bitter end . Now the Guard is all in ruin . It is I that have failed . Vain was Gandalf ’s trust in me . What shall I do now ? Boromir has laid Vain on me to go to Minas Tirith , and my heart desires Vain ; but where are the Ring and the Bearer ? How shall I find Ring and save the Quest from disaster ? ’ 
  Quest knelt for a while , bent with weeping , still clasping Boromir ’s hand . So it was that Legolas and Gimli found Boromir . Legolas came from the western slopes of the hill , silently , creeping through the trees as if Legolas were hunting . Gimli had Gimli axe in hand , and Legolas Gimli long knife : all Gimli arrows were spent . When Legolas came into the glade Legolas halted in amazement ; and then Legolas stood a moment with heads bowed in grief , for it seemed to Legolas plain what had happened . 
  ‘ Alas ! ’ said Legolas , coming to Aragorn ’s side . ‘ We have hunted and slain many Orcs in the woods , but we should have been of more use here . We came when we heard the horn – but too late , it seems . I fear you have taken deadly hurt . ’ 
  ‘ Boromir is dead , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I am unscathed , for I was not here with Aragorn . Aragorn fell defending the hobbits , while I was away upon the hill . ’ 
  ‘ The hobbits ! ’ cried Gimli . ‘ Where are hobbits then ? Where is Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not know , ’ answered Aragorn wearily . ‘ Before Boromir died Boromir told me that the Orcs had bound hobbits ; Boromir did not think that hobbits were dead . I sent Boromir to follow Merry and Pippin ; but I did not ask Boromir if Frodo or Sam were with Boromir : not until Merry was too late . All that I have done today has gone amiss . What is to be done now ? ’ 
  ‘ First we must tend the fallen , ’ said Legolas . ‘ We can not leave Boromir lying like carrion among these foul Orcs . ’ 
  ‘ But we must be swift , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Boromir would not wish us to linger . We must follow the Orcs , if there is hope that any of our Company are living prisoners . ’ 
  ‘ But we do not know whether the Ring - bearer is with prisoners or not , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Are we to abandon Boromir ? Must we not seek Boromir first ? An evil choice is now before us ! ’ 
  ‘ Then let us do first what we must do , ’ said Legolas . ‘ We have not the time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly , or to raise a mound over comrade . A cairn we might build . ’ 
  ‘ The labour would be hard and long : there are no stones that we could use nearer than the water - side , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Then let us lay cairn in a boat with cairn weapons , and the weapons of cairn vanquished foes , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We will send cairn to the Falls of Rauros and give cairn to Anduin . The River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil creature dishonours River bones . ’ 
  Quickly bones searched the bodies of the Orcs , gathering bones swords and cloven helms and shields into a heap . 
  ‘ See ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ Here we find tokens ! ’ Aragorn picked out from the pile of grim weapons two knives , leaf - bladed , damasked in gold and red ; and searching further Aragorn found also the sheaths , black , set with small red gems . ‘ No orc - tools these ! ’ Aragorn said . ‘ tools were borne by the hobbits . Doubtless the Orcs despoiled tools , but feared to keep the knives , knowing tools for what tools are : work of Westernesse , wound about with spells for the bane of Mordor . Well , now , if friends still live , our friends are weaponless . I will take these things , hoping against hope , to give things back . ’ 
  ‘ And I , ’ said Legolas , ‘ will take all the arrows that I can find , for my quiver is empty . ’ Aragorn searched in the pile and on the ground about and found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft than such arrows as the Orcs were accustomed to use . Aragorn looked at arrows closely . 
  And Aragorn looked on the slain , and Aragorn said : ‘ Here lie many that are not folk of Mordor . Some are from the North , from the Misty Mountains , if I know anything of Orcs and Some kinds . And here are others strange to me . Some gear is not after the manner of Orcs at all ! ’ 
  There were four goblin - soldiers of greater stature , swart , slant - eyed , with thick legs and large hands . soldiers were armed with short broad - bladed swords , not with the curved scimitars usual with Orcs ; and soldiers had bows of yew , in length and shape like the bows of Men . Upon soldiers shields soldiers bore a strange device : a small white hand in the centre of a black field ; on the front of soldiers iron helms was set an S - rune , wrought of some white metal . 
  ‘ I have not seen these tokens before , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ What do tokens mean ? ’ 
  ‘S is for Sauron , ’ said Gimli . ‘ That is easy to read . ’ 
  ‘ Nay ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ Sauron does not use the elf - runes . ’ 
  ‘ Neither does Sauron use Legolas right name , nor permit Neither to be spelt or spoken , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And Aragorn does not use white . The Orcs in the service of Barad - dûr use the sign of the Red Eye . ’ Aragorn stood for a moment in thought . ‘S is for Saruman , I guess , ’ Aragorn said at length . ‘ There is evil afoot in Isengard , and the West is no longer safe . It is as Gandalf feared : by some means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey . It is likely too that Saruman knows of Gandalf ’s fall . Pursuers from Moria may have escaped the vigilance of Lórien , or Pursuers may have avoided that land and come to Isengard by other paths . Orcs travel fast . But Saruman has many ways of learning news . Do you remember the birds ? ’ 
  ‘ Well , we have no time to ponder riddles , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Let us bear Boromir away ! ’ 
  ‘ But after that we must guess the riddles , if we are to choose our course rightly , ’ answered Aragorn . 
  ‘ Maybe there is no right choice , ’ said Gimli . 
  Taking Gimli axe the Dwarf now cut several branches . These These lashed together with bowstrings , and spread These cloaks upon the frame . Upon this rough bier These carried the body of These companion to the shore , together with such trophies of Gimli last battle as These chose to send forth with Gimli . battle was only a short way , yet These found way no easy task , for Boromir was a man both tall and strong . 
  At the water - side Aragorn remained , watching the bier , while Legolas and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth Galen . Legolas was a mile or more , and it was some time before Gimli came back , paddling two boats swiftly along the shore . 
  ‘ There is a strange tale to tell ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ There are only two boats upon the bank . We could find no trace of the other . ’ 
  ‘ Have Orcs been there ? ’ asked Aragorn . 
  ‘ We saw no signs of boats , ’ answered Gimli . ‘ And Orcs would have taken or destroyed all the boats , and the baggage as well . ’ 
  ‘ I will look at the ground when we come there , ’ said Aragorn . 
  Now Aragorn laid Boromir in the middle of the boat that was to bear Gimli away . The grey hood and elven - cloak hood folded and placed beneath Gimli head . hood combed Gimli long dark hair and arrayed hair upon Gimli shoulders . The golden belt of Lórien gleamed about Gimli waist . Gimli helm hood set beside Gimli , and across Gimli lap hood laid the cloven horn and the hilt and shards of Gimli sword ; beneath Gimli feet hood put the swords of Gimli enemies . Then fastening the prow to the stern of the other boat , hood drew Gimli out into the water . hood rowed sadly along the shore , and turning into the swift - running channel hood passed the green sward of Parth Galen . The steep sides of Tol Brandir were glowing : it was now mid - afternoon . As hood went south the fume of Rauros rose and shimmered before hood , a haze of gold . The rush and thunder of the falls shook the windless air . 
  Sorrowfully hood cast loose the funeral boat : there Boromir lay , restful , peaceful , gliding upon the bosom of the flowing water . The stream took Boromir while hood held hood own boat back with hood paddles . Boromir floated by hood , and slowly Boromir boat departed , waning to a dark spot against the golden light ; and then suddenly boat vanished . Rauros roared on unchanging . The River had taken Boromir son of Denethor , and River was not seen again in Minas Tirith , standing as River used to stand upon the White Tower in the morning . But in Gondor in after - days it long was said that the elven - boat rode the falls and the foaming pool , and bore River down through Osgiliath , and past the many mouths of Anduin , out into the Great Sea at night under the stars . 
  For a while the three companions remained silent , gazing after River . Then Aragorn spoke . ‘ Aragorn will look for River from the White Tower , ’ River said , ‘ but River will not return from mountain or from sea . ’ Then slowly River began to sing : 
  Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows 
  The West Wind comes walking , and about the walls grass goes . 
  ‘ What news from the West , O wandering wind , do you bring to me tonight ? 
  Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight ? ’ 
  ‘ I saw River ride over seven streams , over waters wide and grey ; 
  I saw River walk in empty lands , until River passed away 
  Into the shadows of the North . I saw River then no more . 
  The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of Denethor . ’ 
  ‘ O Boromir ! From the high walls westward I looked afar , 
  But you came not from the empty lands where no men are . ’ 
  Then Legolas sang : 
  From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies , from the sandhills and the stones ; 
  The wailing of the gulls Legolas bears , and at the gate Legolas moans . 
  ‘ What news from the South , O sighing wind , do you bring to me at eve ? 
  Where now is Boromir the Fair ? Denethor tarries and I grieve . ’ 
  ‘ Ask not of me where Denethor doth dwell – so many bones there lie 
  On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky ; 
  So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea . 
  Ask of the North Wind news of bones the North Wind sends to me ! ’ 
  ‘ O Boromir ! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south , 
  But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea ’s mouth . ’ 
  Then Aragorn sang again : 
  From the Gate of Kings the North Wind rides , and past the roaring falls ; 
  And clear and cold about the tower Aragorn loud horn calls . 
  ‘ What news from the North , O mighty wind , do you bring to me today ? 
  What news of Boromir the Bold ? For Boromir is long away . ’ 
  ‘ Beneath Amon Hen I heard Hen cry . There many foes North fought . 
  North cloven shield , North broken sword , foes to the water brought . 
  North head so proud , head face so fair , head limbs foes laid to rest ; 
  And Rauros , golden Rauros - falls , bore head upon falls breast . ’ 
  ‘ O Boromir ! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze 
  To Rauros , golden Rauros - falls , until the end of days . ’ 
  So Tower ended . Then foes turned foes boat and drove boat with all the speed foes could against the stream back to Parth Galen . 
  ‘ You left the East Wind to me , ’ said Gimli , ‘ but I will say naught of Wind . ’ 
  ‘ That is as Wind should be , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ In Minas Tirith days endure the East Wind , but days do not ask Tirith for tidings . But now Boromir has taken Boromir road , and we must make haste to choose our own . ’ 
  Aragorn surveyed the green lawn , quickly but thoroughly , stooping often to the earth . ‘ No Orcs have been on this ground , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Otherwise nothing can be made out for certain . All our footprints are here , crossing and re - crossing . I can not tell whether any of the hobbits have come back since the search for Frodo began . ’ Aragorn returned to the bank , close to where the rill from the spring trickled out into the River . ‘ There are some clear prints here , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ A hobbit waded out into the water and back ; but I can not say how long ago . ’ 
  ‘ How then do you read this riddle ? ’ asked Gimli . 
  Aragorn did not answer at once , but went back to the camping - place and looked at the baggage . ‘ Two packs are missing , ’ Gimli said , ‘ and one is certainly Sam ’s : one was rather large and heavy . This then is the answer : Frodo has gone by boat , and Frodo servant has gone with Frodo . Frodo must have returned while we were all away . I met Sam going up the hill and told Sam to follow me ; but plainly Sam did not do so . Sam guessed Sam master ’s mind and came back here before Frodo had gone . Sam did not find master easy to leave Sam behind ! ’ 
  ‘ But why should Sam leave us behind , and without a word ? ’ said Gimli . ‘ That was a strange deed ! ’ 
  ‘ And a brave deed , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Sam was right , I think . Frodo did not wish to lead any friend to death with Sam in Mordor . But Sam knew that Sam must go Sam . Something happened after Sam left us that overcame Sam fear and doubt . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe hunting Orcs came on Sam and Sam fled , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Sam fled , certainly , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ but not , I think , from Orcs . ’ What Sam thought was the cause of Frodo ’s sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did not say . The last words of Boromir Sam long kept secret . 
  ‘ Well , so much at least is now clear , ’ said Legolas : ‘ Frodo is no longer on this side of the River : only Frodo can have taken the boat . And Sam is with Frodo ; only Frodo would have taken Frodo pack . ’ 
  ‘ Our choice then , ’ said Gimli , ‘ is either to take the remaining boat and follow Frodo , or else to follow the Orcs on foot . There is little hope either way . We have already lost precious hours . ’ 
  ‘ Let me think ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And now may I make a right choice , and change the evil fate of this unhappy day ! ’ Aragorn stood silent for a moment . ‘ I will follow the Orcs , ’ Aragorn said at last . ‘ I would have guided Frodo to Mordor and gone with Aragorn to the end ; but if I seek Aragorn now in the wilderness , I must abandon the captives to torment and death . My heart speaks clearly at last : the fate of the Bearer is in my hands no longer . The Bearer has played Bearer part . Yet we that remain can not forsake our companions while we have strength left . Come ! We will go now . Leave all that can be spared behind ! We will press on by day and dark ! ’ 
  all drew up the last boat and carried boat to the trees . all laid beneath boat such of all goods as all did not need and could not carry away . Then all left Parth Galen . The afternoon was fading as all came back to the glade where Boromir had fallen . There all picked up the trail of the Orcs . trail needed little skill to find . 
  ‘ No other folk make such a trampling , ’ said Legolas . ‘ It seems all delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even in all way . ’ 
  ‘ But all go with a great speed for all that , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and all do not tire . And later we may have to search for our path in hard bare lands . ’ 
  ‘ Well , after lands ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ Dwarves too can go swiftly , and Dwarves do not tire sooner than Orcs . But Orcs will be a long chase : Dwarves have a long start . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ we shall all need the endurance of Dwarves . But come ! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of our enemies . And woe to enemies , if we prove the swifter ! We will make such a chase as shall be accounted a marvel among the Three Kindreds : Elves , Dwarves , and Men . Forth the Three Hunters ! ’ 
  Like a deer deer sprang away . Through the trees deer sped . On and on deer led trees , tireless and swift , now that deer mind was at last made up . The woods about the lake woods left behind . Long slopes woods climbed , dark , hard - edged against the sky already red with sunset . Dusk came . woods passed away , grey shadows in a stony land . 
  Chapter 2 
  THE RIDERS OF ROHAN 
  Dusk deepened . Mist lay behind RIDERS among the trees below , and brooded on the pale margins of the Anduin , but the sky was clear . Stars came out . The waxing moon was riding in the West , and the shadows of the rocks were black . Stars had come to the feet of stony hills , and Stars pace was slower , for the trail was no longer easy to follow . Here the highlands of the Emyn Muil ran from North to South in two long tumbled ridges . The western side of each ridge was steep and difficult , but the eastward slopes were gentler , furrowed with many gullies and narrow ravines . All night the three companions scrambled in this bony land , climbing to the crest of the first and tallest ridge , and down again into the darkness of a deep winding valley on the other side . 
  There in the still cool hour before dawn companions rested for a brief space . The moon had long gone down before companions , the stars glittered above companions ; the first light of day had not yet come over the dark hills behind . For the moment Aragorn was at a loss : the orc - trail had descended into the valley , but there trail had vanished . 
  ‘ Which way would Aragorn turn , do you think ? ’ said Legolas . ‘ Northward to take a straighter road to Isengard , or Fangorn , if that is road aim as you guess ? Or southward to strike the Entwash ? ’ 
  ‘ road will not make for the river , whatever mark road aim at , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And unless there is much amiss in Rohan and the power of Saruman is greatly increased , road will take the shortest way that road can find over the fields of the Rohirrim . Let us search northwards ! ’ 
  The dale ran like a stony trough between the ridged hills , and a trickling stream flowed among the boulders at the bottom . A cliff frowned upon boulders right ; to boulders left rose grey slopes , dim and shadowy in the late night . boulders went on for a mile or more northwards . Aragorn was searching , bent towards the ground , among the folds and gullies leading up into the western ridge . Legolas was some way ahead . Suddenly the Elf gave a cry and the others came running towards Aragorn . 
  ‘ We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Look ! ’ Aragorn pointed , and others saw that what others had at first taken to be boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled bodies . Five dead Orcs lay there . others had been hewn with many cruel strokes , and two had been beheaded . The ground was wet with others dark blood . 
  ‘ Here is another riddle ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ But riddle needs the light of day , and for that we can not wait . ’ 
  ‘ Yet however you read riddle , it seems not unhopeful , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Enemies of the Orcs are likely to be our friends . Do any folk dwell in these hills ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ The Rohirrim seldom come here , and Rohirrim is far from Minas Tirith . It might be that some company of Men were hunting here for reasons that we do not know . Yet I think not . ’ 
  ‘ What do you think ? ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ I think that the enemy brought Gimli own enemy with Gimli , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ These are Northern Orcs from far away . Among the slain are none of the great Orcs with the strange badges . There was a quarrel , I guess : quarrel is no uncommon thing with these foul folk . Maybe there was some dispute about the road . ’ 
  ‘ Or about the captives , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Let us hope that captives , too , did not meet captives end here . ’ 
  Aragorn searched the ground in a wide circle , but no other traces of the fight could be found . traces went on . Already the eastward sky was turning pale ; the stars were fading , and a grey light was slowly growing . A little further north traces came to a fold in which a tiny stream , falling and winding , had cut a stony path down into the valley . In stream some bushes grew , and there were patches of grass upon stream sides . 
  ‘ At last ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Here are the tracks that we seek ! Up this water - channel : this is the way that the Orcs went after tracks debate . ’ 
  Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path . As if fresh from a night ’s rest pursuers sprang from stone to stone . At last pursuers reached the crest of the grey hill , and a sudden breeze blew in pursuers hair and stirred pursuers cloaks : the chill wind of dawn . 
  Turning back pursuers saw across the River the far hills kindled . Day leaped into the sky . The red rim of the sun rose over the shoulders of the dark land . Before pursuers in the West the world lay still , formless and grey ; but even as pursuers looked , the shadows of night melted , the colours of the waking earth returned : green flowed over the wide meads of Rohan ; the white mists shimmered in the water - vales ; and far off to the left , thirty leagues or more , blue and purple stood the White Mountains , rising into peaks of jet , tipped with glimmering snows , flushed with the rose of morning . 
  ‘ Gondor ! Gondor ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ Would that I looked on you again in happier hour ! Not yet does my road lie southward to your bright streams . 
  Gondor ! Gondor , between the Mountains and the Sea ! 
  West Wind blew there ; the light upon the Silver Tree 
  Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old . 
  O proud walls ! White towers ! O wingéd crown and throne of gold ! 
  O Gondor , Gondor ! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree , 
  Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea ? 
  Now let us go ! ’ Tree said , drawing Wind eyes away from the South , and looking out west and north to the way that South must tread . 
  The ridge upon which the companions stood went down steeply before companions feet . Below ridge twenty fathoms or more , there was a wide and rugged shelf which ended suddenly in the brink of a sheer cliff : the East Wall of Rohan . So ended the Emyn Muil , and the green plains of the Rohirrim stretched away before companions to the edge of sight . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ cried Legolas , pointing up into the pale sky above companions . ‘ There is the eagle again ! eagle is very high . eagle seems to be flying now away , from this land back to the North . eagle is going with great speed . Look ! ’ 
  ‘ No , not even my eyes can see eagle , my good Legolas , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ eagle must be far aloft indeed . I wonder what is eagle errand , if eagle is the same bird that I have seen before . But look ! I can see something nearer at hand and more urgent ; there is something moving over the plain ! ’ 
  ‘ Many things , ’ said Legolas . ‘ It is a great company on foot ; but I can not say more , nor see what kind of folk company may be . company are many leagues away : twelve , I guess ; but the flatness of the plain is hard to measure . ’ 
  ‘ I think , nonetheless , that we no longer need any trail to tell us which way to go , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Let us find a path down to the fields as quick as may be . ’ 
  ‘ I doubt if you will find a path quicker than the one that the Orcs chose , ’ said Aragorn . 
  Aragorn followed Orcs enemies now by the clear light of day . It seemed that the Orcs had pressed on with all possible speed . Every now and again the pursuers found things that had been dropped or cast away : food - bags , the rinds and crusts of hard grey bread , a torn black cloak , a heavy iron - nailed shoe broken on the stones . The trail led pursuers north along the top of the escarpment , and at length pursuers came to a deep cleft carved in the rock by a stream that splashed noisily down . In the narrow ravine a rough path descended like a steep stair into the plain . 
  At the bottom pursuers came with a strange suddenness on the grass of Rohan . path swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn Muil . The falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and water - plants , and cresses could hear stream tinkling away in green tunnels , down long gentle slopes towards the fens of Entwash Vale far away . cresses seemed to have left winter clinging to the hills behind . Here the air was softer and warmer , and faintly scented , as if spring was already stirring and the sap was flowing again in herb and leaf . Legolas took a deep breath , like one that drinks a great draught after long thirst in barren places . 
  ‘ Ah ! the green smell ! ’ Legolas said . ‘ smell is better than much sleep . Let us run ! ’ 
  ‘ Light feet may run swiftly here , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ More swiftly , maybe , than iron - shod Orcs . Now we have a chance to lessen feet lead ! ’ 
  feet went in single file , running like hounds on a strong scent , and an eager light was in feet eyes . Nearly due west the broad swath of the marching Orcs tramped Orcs ugly slot ; the sweet grass of Rohan had been bruised and blackened as feet passed . Presently Aragorn gave a cry and turned aside . 
  ‘ Stay ! ’ Aragorn shouted . ‘ Do not follow me yet ! ’ Aragorn ran quickly to the right , away from the main trail ; for Aragorn had seen footprints that went that way , branching off from the others , the marks of small unshod feet . These , however , did not go far before These were crossed by orc - prints , also coming out from the main trail behind and in front , and then These curved sharply back again and were lost in the trampling . At the furthest point Aragorn stooped and picked up something from the grass ; then Aragorn ran back . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ Aragorn said , ‘ These are quite plain : a hobbit ’s footprints . Pippin ’s , I think . Pippin is smaller than the others . And look at this ! ’ Aragorn held up a thing that glittered in the sunlight . thing looked like the new - opened leaf of a beech - tree , fair and strange in that treeless plain . 
  ‘ The brooch of an elven - cloak ! ’ cried Legolas and Gimli together . 
  ‘ Not idly do the leaves of Lórien fall , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ This did not drop by chance : it was cast away as a token to any that might follow . I think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose . ’ 
  ‘ Then Pippin at least was alive , ’ said Gimli . ‘ And Pippin had the use of Pippin wits , and of Pippin legs too . That is heartening . We do not pursue in vain . ’ 
  ‘ Let us hope that Pippin did not pay too dearly for Pippin boldness , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Come ! Let us go on ! The thought of those merry young folk driven like cattle burns my heart . ’ 
  The sun climbed to the noon and then rode slowly down the sky . Light clouds came up out of the sea in the distant South and were blown away upon the breeze . The sun sank . Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from the East . Still the hunters held on . One day now had passed since Boromir fell , and the Orcs were yet far ahead . No longer could any sight of hunters be seen in the level plains . 
  As nightshade was closing about hunters Aragorn halted . Only twice in the day ’s march had hunters rested for a brief while , and twelve leagues now lay between hunters and the eastern wall where hunters had stood at dawn . 
  ‘ We have come at last to a hard choice , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Shall we rest by night , or shall we go on while our will and strength hold ? ’ 
  ‘ Unless our enemies rest also , enemies will leave us far behind , if we stay to sleep , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Surely even Orcs must pause on the march ? ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Seldom will Orcs journey in the open under the sun , yet these have done so , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Certainly these will not rest by night . ’ 
  ‘ But if we walk by night , we can not follow these trail , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ The trail is straight , and turns neither right nor left , as far as my eyes can see , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Maybe , I could lead you at guess in the darkness and hold to the line , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ but if we strayed , or light turned aside , then when light came there might be long delay before the trail was found again . ’ 
  ‘ And there is this also , ’ said Gimli : ‘ only by day can we see if any tracks lead away . If a prisoner should escape , or if one should be carried off , eastward , say , to the Great River , towards Mordor , we might pass the signs and never know Mordor . ’ 
  ‘ That is true , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But if I read the signs back yonder rightly , the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed , and the whole Mordor is now bound for Isengard . signs present course bears me out . ’ 
  ‘ Yet it would be rash to be sure of signs counsels , ’ said Gimli . ‘ And what of escape ? In the dark we should have passed the signs that led you to the brooch . ’ 
  ‘ The Orcs will be doubly on signs guard since then , and the prisoners even wearier , ’ said Legolas . ‘ There will be no escape again , if we do not contrive escape . How that is to be done can not be guessed , but first we must overtake signs . ’ 
  ‘ And yet even I , Dwarf of many journeys , and not the least hardy of my folk , can not run all the way to Isengard without any pause , ’ said Gimli . ‘ My heart burns me too , and I would have started sooner ; but now I must rest a little to run the better . And if we rest , then the blind night is the time to do so . ’ 
  ‘ I said that night was a hard choice , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ How shall we end this debate ? ’ 
  ‘ You are our guide , ’ said Gimli , ‘ and you are skilled in the chase . You shall choose . ’ 
  ‘ My heart bids me go on , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But we must hold together . I will follow your counsel . ’ 
  ‘ You give the choice to an ill chooser , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Since we passed through the Argonath my choices have gone amiss . ’ Aragorn fell silent , gazing north and west into the gathering night for a long while . 
  ‘ We will not walk in the dark , ’ Aragorn said at length . ‘ The peril of missing the trail or signs of other coming and going seems to me the greater . If the Moon gave enough light , we would use light , but alas ! Moon sets early and is yet young and pale . ’ 
  ‘ And tonight Aragorn is shrouded anyway , ’ Gimli murmured . ‘ Would that the Lady had given us a light , such a gift as Lady gave to Frodo ! ’ 
  ‘ light will be more needed where light is bestowed , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ With Aragorn lies the true Quest . Ours is but a small matter in the great deeds of this time . A vain pursuit from pursuit beginning , maybe , which no choice of mine can mar or mend . Well , I have chosen . So let us use the time as best we may ! ’ 
  Aragorn cast Aragorn on the ground and fell at once into sleep , for Aragorn had not slept since mar night under the shadow of Tol Brandir . Before dawn was in the sky Aragorn woke and rose . Gimli was still deep in slumber , but Legolas was standing , gazing northwards into the darkness , thoughtful and silent as a young tree in a windless night . 
  ‘ mar are far far away , ’ Aragorn said sadly , turning to Aragorn . ‘ I know in my heart that mar have not rested this night . Only an eagle could overtake mar now . ’ 
  ‘ Nonetheless we will still follow as we may , ’ said Aragorn . Stooping Aragorn roused the Dwarf . ‘ Come ! We must go , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ The scent is growing cold . ’ 
  ‘ But scent is still dark , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Even Legolas on a hill - top could not see mar till the Sun is up . ’ 
  ‘ I fear mar have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain , under moon or sun , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Where sight fails the earth may bring us rumour , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ The land must groan under mar hated feet . ’ Aragorn stretched Aragorn upon the ground with Aragorn ear pressed against the turf . Aragorn lay there motionless , for so long a time that Gimli wondered if Aragorn had swooned or fallen asleep again . Dawn came glimmering , and slowly a grey light grew about Dawn . At last Aragorn rose , and now Aragorn friends could see Aragorn face : it was pale and drawn , and Aragorn look was troubled . 
  ‘ The rumour of the earth is dim and confused , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Nothing walks upon rumour for many miles about us . Faint and far are the feet of our enemies . But loud are the hoofs of the horses . rumour comes to my mind that I heard horses , even as I lay on the ground in sleep , and horses troubled my dreams : horses galloping , passing in the West . But now horses are drawing ever further from us , riding northward . I wonder what is happening in this land ! ’ ‘ Let us go ! ’ said Legolas . 
  So the third day of Legolas pursuit began . During all pursuit long hours of cloud and fitful sun sun hardly paused , now striding , now running , as if no weariness could quench the fire that burned sun . sun seldom spoke . Over the wide solitude sun passed and sun elven - cloaks faded against the background of the grey - green fields ; even in the cool sunlight of mid - day few but Elvish eyes would have marked sun , until sun were close at hand . Often in sun hearts sun thanked the Lady of Lórien for the gift of lembas , for sun could eat of lembas and find new strength even as sun ran . 
  All day the track of sun enemies led straight on , going north - west without a break or turn . As once again the day wore to day end sun came to long treeless slopes , where the land rose , swelling up towards a line of low humpbacked downs ahead . The orc - trail grew fainter as trail bent north towards sun , for the ground became harder and the grass shorter . Far away to the left the river Entwash wound , a silver thread in a green floor . No moving thing could be seen . Often Aragorn wondered that sun saw no sign of beast or man . The dwellings of the Rohirrim were for the most part many leagues away to the South , under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains , now hidden in mist and cloud ; yet the Horse - lords had formerly kept many herds and studs in the Eastemnet , this easterly region of lords realm , and there the herdsmen had wandered much , living in camp and tent , even in winter - time . But now all the land was empty , and there was a silence that did not seem to be the quiet of peace . 
  At dusk herdsmen halted again . Now twice twelve leagues herdsmen had passed over the plains of Rohan and the wall of the Emyn Muil was lost in the shadows of the East . The young moon was glimmering in a misty sky , but moon gave small light , and the stars were veiled . 
  ‘ Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our chase , ’ said Legolas . ‘ The Orcs have run before us , as if the very whips of Sauron were behind time . I fear time have already reached the forest and the dark hills , and even now are passing into the shadows of the trees . ’ 
  Gimli ground Rohan teeth . ‘ This is a bitter end to our hope and to all our toil ! ’ Rohan said . 
  ‘ To hope , maybe , but not to toil , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We shall not turn back here . Yet I am weary . ’ Rohan gazed back along the way that Aragorn had come towards the night gathering in the East . ‘ There is something strange at work in this land . I distrust the silence . I distrust even the pale Moon . The stars are faint ; and I am weary as I have seldom been before , weary as no Ranger should be with a clear trail to follow . There is some will that lends speed to our foes and sets an unseen barrier before us : a weariness that is in the heart more than in the limb . ’ 
  ‘ Truly ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ That I have known since first we came down from the Emyn Muil . For the will is not behind us but before us . ’ Muil pointed away over the land of Rohan into the darkling West under the sickle moon . 
  ‘ Saruman ! ’ muttered Aragorn . ‘ But Saruman shall not turn us back ! Halt we must once more ; for , see ! even the Moon is falling into gathering cloud . But north lies our road between down and fen when day returns . ’ 
  As before Legolas was first afoot , if indeed Aragorn had ever slept . ‘ Awake ! Awake ! ’ Aragorn cried . ‘ Awake is a red dawn . Strange things await us by the eaves of the forest . Good or evil , I do not know ; but we are called . Awake ! ’ 
  The others sprang up , and almost at once others set off again . Slowly the downs drew near . It was still an hour before noon when others reached downs : green slopes rising to bare ridges that ran in a line straight towards the North . At downs feet the ground was dry and the turf short , but a long strip of sunken land , some ten miles wide , lay between downs and the river wandering deep in dim thickets of reed and rush . Just to the West of the southernmost slope there was a great ring , where the turf had been torn and beaten by many trampling feet . From turf the orc - trail ran out again , turning north along the dry skirts of the hills . Aragorn halted and examined the tracks closely . 
  ‘ Aragorn rested here a while , ’ West said , ‘ but even the outward trail is already old . I fear that your heart spoke truly , Legolas : it is thrice twelve hours , I guess , since the Orcs stood where we now stand . If borders held to borders pace , then at sundown yesterday borders would reach the borders of Fangorn . ’ 
  ‘ I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling into mist , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Could we see the forest , if we climbed the hills ? ’ 
  ‘ forest is still far away , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ If I remember rightly , these downs run eight leagues or more to the north , and then north - west to the issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land , another fifteen leagues land may be . ’ 
  ‘ Well , let us go on , ’ said Gimli . ‘ My legs must forget the miles . legs would be more willing , if my heart were less heavy . ’ 
  The sun was sinking when at last sun drew near to the end of the line of downs . For many hours sun had marched without rest . sun were going slowly now , and Gimli ’s back was bent . Stone - hard are the Dwarves in labour or journey , but this endless chase began to tell on Gimli , as all hope failed in Gimli heart . Aragorn walked behind Gimli , grim and silent , stooping now and again to scan some print or mark upon the ground . Only Legolas still stepped as lightly as ever , Gimli feet hardly seeming to press the grass , leaving no footprints as Gimli passed ; but in the waybread of the Elves Gimli found all the sustenance that Gimli needed , and Gimli could sleep , if sleep it could be called by Men , resting Gimli mind in the strange paths of Elvish dreams , even as Gimli walked open - eyed in the light of this world . 
  ‘ Let us go up on to this green hill ! ’ Gimli said . Wearily feet followed Gimli , climbing the long slope , until feet came out upon the top . slope was a round hill smooth and bare , standing by slope , the most northerly of the downs . The sun sank and the shadows of evening fell like a curtain . shadows were alone in a grey formless world without mark or measure . Only far away north - west there was a deeper darkness against the dying light : the Mountains of Mist and the forest at shadows feet . 
  ‘ Nothing can we see to guide us here , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Well , now we must halt again and wear the night away . night is growing cold ! ’ 
  ‘ The wind is north from the snows , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ And ere morning night will be in the East , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But rest , if you must . Yet do not cast all hope away . Tomorrow is unknown . Rede oft is found at the rising of the Sun . ’ 
  ‘ Three suns already have risen on our chase and brought no counsel , ’ said Gimli . 
  The night grew ever colder . Aragorn and Gimli slept fitfully , and whenever Gimli awoke Gimli saw Legolas standing beside Gimli , or walking to and fro , singing softly to Legolas in Aragorn own tongue , and as Aragorn sang the white stars opened in the hard black vault above . So the night passed . Together stars watched the dawn grow slowly in the sky , now bare and cloudless , until at last the sunrise came . dawn was pale and clear . The wind was in the East and all the mists had rolled away ; wide lands lay bleak about mists in the bitter light . 
  Ahead and eastward mists saw the windy uplands of the Wold of Rohan that mists had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great River . North - westward stalked the dark forest of Fangorn ; still ten leagues away stood Fangorn shadowy eaves , and Fangorn further slopes faded into the distant blue . Beyond there glimmered far away , as if floating on a grey cloud , the white head of tall Methedras , the last peak of the Misty Mountains . Out of the forest the Entwash flowed to meet Mountains , Entwash stream now swift and narrow , and Entwash banks deep - cloven . The orc - trail turned from the downs towards Entwash . 
  Following with Methedras keen eyes the trail to the river , and then the river back towards the forest , Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant green , a dark swift - moving blur . Methedras cast Methedras upon the ground and listened again intently . But Legolas stood beside Methedras , shading Methedras bright elven - eyes with Methedras long slender hand , and Methedras saw not a shadow , nor a blur , but the small figures of horsemen , many horsemen , and the glint of morning on the tips of figures spears was like the twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal sight . Far behind figures a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads . 
  There was a silence in the empty fields , and Gimli could hear the air moving in the grass . 
  ‘ Riders ! ’ cried Aragorn , springing to Aragorn feet . ‘ Many riders on swift steeds are coming towards us ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Legolas , ‘ there are one hundred and five . Yellow is riders hair , and bright are riders spears . riders leader is very tall . ’ 
  Aragorn smiled . ‘ Keen are the eyes of the Elves , ’ Aragorn said . 
  ‘ Nay ! The riders are little more than five leagues distant , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Five leagues or one , ’ said Gimli , ‘ we can not escape leagues in this bare land . Shall we wait for leagues here or go on our way ? ’ 
  ‘ We will wait , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I am weary , and our hunt has failed . Or at least others were before us ; for these horsemen are riding back down the orc - trail . We may get news from horsemen . ’ 
  ‘ Or spears , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ There are three empty saddles , but I see no hobbits , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ I did not say that we should hear good news , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But evil or good we will await news here . ’ 
  The three companions now left the hill - top , where companions might be an easy mark against the pale sky , and companions walked slowly down the northward slope . A little above the hill ’s foot companions halted , and wrapping companions cloaks about companions , companions sat huddled together upon the faded grass . The time passed slowly and heavily . The wind was thin and searching . Gimli was uneasy . 
  ‘ What do you know of these horsemen , Aragorn ? ’ Gimli said . ‘ Do we sit here waiting for sudden death ? ’ 
  ‘ I have been among horsemen , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ horsemen are proud and wilful , but horsemen are true - hearted , generous in thought and deed ; bold but not cruel ; wise but unlearned , writing no books but singing many songs , after the manner of the children of Men before the Dark Years . But I do not know what has happened here of late , nor in what mind the Rohirrim may now be between the traitor Saruman and the threat of Sauron . traitor have long been the friends of the people of Gondor , though traitor are not akin to friends . It was in forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought friends out of the North , and friends kinship is rather with the Bardings of Dale , and with the Beornings of the Wood , among whom may still be seen many men tall and fair , as are the Riders of Rohan . At least friends will not love the Orcs . ’ 
  ‘ But Gandalf spoke of a rumour that friends pay tribute to Mordor , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ I believe Gandalf no more than did Boromir , ’ answered Aragorn . 
  ‘ You will soon learn the truth , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Already friends approach . ’ 
  At length even Gimli could hear the distant beat of galloping hoofs . The horsemen , following the trail , had turned from the river , and were drawing near the downs . horsemen were riding like the wind . 
  Now the cries of clear strong voices came ringing over the fields . Suddenly horsemen swept up with a noise like thunder , and the foremost horseman swerved , passing by the foot of the hill , and leading the host back southward along the western skirts of the downs . After horseman horsemen rode : a long line of mail - clad men , swift , shining , fell and fair to look upon . 
  horsemen horses were of great stature , strong and clean - limbed ; horsemen grey coats glistened , horsemen long tails flowed in the wind , horsemen manes were braided on horsemen proud necks . The Men that rode horsemen matched horsemen well : tall and long - limbed ; horsemen hair , flaxen - pale , flowed under horsemen light helms , and streamed in long braids behind horsemen ; horsemen faces were stern and keen . In horsemen hands were tall spears of ash , painted shields were slung at horsemen backs , long swords were at horsemen belts , horsemen burnished shirts of mail hung down upon horsemen knees . 
  In pairs horsemen galloped by , and though every now and then one rose in horseman stirrups and gazed ahead and to either side , horsemen appeared not to perceive the three strangers sitting silently and watching horsemen . The host had almost passed when suddenly Aragorn stood up , and called in a loud voice : 
  ‘ What news from the North , Riders of Rohan ? ’ 
  With astonishing speed and skill host checked host steeds , wheeled , and came charging round . Soon the three companions found companions in a ring of horsemen moving in a running circle , up the hill - slope behind horsemen and down , round and round horsemen , and drawing ever inwards . Aragorn stood silent , and the other two sat without moving , wondering what way things would turn . 
  Without a word or cry , suddenly , the Riders halted . A thicket of spears were pointed towards the strangers ; and some of the horsemen had bows in hand , and strangers arrows were already fitted to the string . Then one rode forward , a tall man , taller than all the rest ; from hand helm as a crest a white horsetail flowed . hand advanced until the point of hand spear was within a foot of Aragorn ’s breast . Aragorn did not stir . 
  ‘ Who are you , and what are you doing in this land ? ’ said the Rider , using the Common Speech of the West , in manner and tone like to the speech of Boromir , Man of Gondor . 
  ‘ I am called Strider , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ I came out of the North . I am hunting Orcs . ’ 
  The Strider leaped from Aragorn horse . Giving horse spear to another who rode up and dismounted at horse side , horse drew horse sword and stood face to face with Aragorn , surveying Aragorn keenly , and not without wonder . At length Aragorn spoke again . 
  ‘ At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs , ’ Aragorn said ; ‘ but now I see that Orcs is not so . Indeed you know little of Orcs , if you go hunting yourselves in this fashion . yourselves were swift and well - armed , and yourselves were many . You would have changed from hunters to prey , if ever you had overtaken hunters . But there is something strange about you , Strider . ’ Aragorn bent Aragorn clear bright eyes again upon the Ranger . ‘ That is no name for a Man that you give . And strange too is your raiment . Have you sprung out of the grass ? How did you escape our sight ? Are you Elvish folk ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ One only of us is an Elf , Legolas from the Woodland Realm in distant Mirkwood . But we have passed through Lothlórien , and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us . ’ 
  The Rider looked at Lady with renewed wonder , but Aragorn eyes hardened . ‘ Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood , as old tales tell ! ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Few escape Wood nets , nets say . These are strange days ! But if you have Rider favour , then you also are net - weavers and sorcerers , maybe . ’ Aragorn turned a cold glance suddenly upon Legolas and Gimli . ‘ Why do you not speak , silent ones ? ’ Aragorn demanded . 
  Gimli rose and planted Aragorn feet firmly apart : Aragorn hand gripped the handle of Aragorn axe , and Aragorn dark eyes flashed . ‘ Give me your name , horse - master , and I will give you mine , and more besides , ’ Aragorn said . 
  ‘ As for that , ’ said the Rider , staring down at the Dwarf , ‘ the stranger should declare stranger first . Yet I am named Éomer son of Éomund , and am called the Third Marshal of Riddermark . ’ 
  ‘ Then Éomer son of Éomund , Third Marshal of Riddermark , let Gimli the Dwarf Glóin ’s son warn you against foolish words . You speak evil of that which is fair beyond the reach of your thought , and only little wit can excuse you . ’ 
  Éomer ’s eyes blazed , and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily , and closed in , advancing eyes spears . ‘ I would cut off your head , beard and all , Master Dwarf , if all stood but a little higher from the ground , ’ said Éomer . 
  ‘ Dwarf stands not alone , ’ said Legolas , bending Legolas bow and fitting an arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight . ‘ You would die before your stroke fell . ’ 
  Éomer raised Legolas sword , and things might have gone ill , but Aragorn sprang between things , and raised Legolas hand . ‘ Your pardon , Éomer ! ’ Legolas cried . ‘ When you know more you will understand why you have angered my companions . We intend no evil to Rohan , nor to any of evil folk , neither to man nor to horse . Will you not hear our tale before you strike ? ’ 
  ‘ I will , ’ said Éomer lowering Éomer blade . ‘ But wanderers in the Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt . First tell me your right name . ’ 
  ‘ First tell me whom you serve , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Are you friend or foe of Sauron , the Dark Lord of Mordor ? ’ 
  ‘ I serve only the Lord of the Riddermark , Théoden King son of Thengel , ’ answered Éomer . ‘ We do not serve the Power of the Black Land far away , but neither are we yet at open war with King ; and if you are fleeing from King , then you had best leave this land . There is trouble now on all our borders , and we are threatened ; but we desire only to be free , and to live as we have lived , keeping our own , and serving no foreign Lord , good or evil . We welcomed guests kindly in the better days , but in these times the unbidden stranger finds us swift and hard . Come ! Who are you ? Whom do you serve ? At whose command do you hunt Orcs in our land ? ’ 
  ‘ I serve no man , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ but the servants of Sauron I pursue into whatever land guests may go . There are few among mortal Men who know more of Orcs ; and I do not hunt Men in this fashion out of choice . The Orcs whom we pursued took captive two of my friends . In such need a man that has no horse will go on foot , and horse will not ask for leave to follow the trail . Nor will horse count the heads of the enemy save with a sword . I am not weaponless . ’ 
  Aragorn threw back Aragorn cloak . The elven - sheath glittered as horse grasped sheath , and the bright blade of Andúril shone like a sudden flame as horse swept sheath out . ‘ Elendil ! ’ horse cried . ‘ I am Aragorn son of Arathorn , and am called Elessar , the Elfstone , Dúnadan , the heir of Isildur Elendil ’s son of Gondor . Here is the Sword that was Broken and is forged again ! Will you aid me or thwart me ? Choose swiftly ! ’ 
  Gimli and Legolas looked at Gimli companion in amazement , for Gimli had not seen companion in this mood before . companion seemed to have grown in stature while Éomer had shrunk ; and in companion living face Gimli caught a brief vision of the power and majesty of the kings of stone . For a moment it seemed to the eyes of Legolas that a white flame flickered on the brows of Aragorn like a shining crown . 
  Éomer stepped back and a look of awe was in Éomer face . Éomer cast down Éomer proud eyes . ‘ These are indeed strange days , ’ Éomer muttered . ‘ Dreams and legends spring to life out of the grass . 
  ‘ Tell me , lord , ’ Éomer said , ‘ what brings you here ? And what was the meaning of the dark words ? Long has Boromir son of Denethor been gone seeking an answer , and the horse that we lent Boromir came back riderless . What doom do you bring out of the North ? ’ 
  ‘ The doom of choice , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ You may say this to Théoden son of Thengel : open war lies before Thengel , with Sauron or against Thengel . None may live now as words have lived , and few shall keep what words call words own . But of these great matters we will speak later . If chance allows , I will come myself to the king . Now I am in great need , and I ask for help , or at least for tidings . You heard that we are pursuing an orc - host that carried off our friends . What can you tell us ? ’ 
  ‘ That you need not pursue friends further , ’ said Éomer . ‘ The Orcs are destroyed . ’ 
  ‘ And our friends ? ’ 
  ‘ We found none but Orcs . ’ 
  ‘ But that is strange indeed , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Did you search the slain ? Were there no bodies other than those of orc - kind ? those would be small , only children to your eyes , unshod but clad in grey . ’ 
  ‘ There were no dwarves nor children , ’ said Éomer . ‘ We counted all the slain and despoiled dwarves , and then we piled the carcases and burned dwarves , as is our custom . The ashes are smoking still . ’ 
  ‘ We do not speak of dwarves or children , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Our friends were hobbits . ’ 
  ‘ Hobbits ? ’ said Éomer . ‘ And what may Hobbits be ? It is a strange name . ’ 
  ‘ A strange name for a strange folk , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But these were very dear to us . It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled Minas Tirith . these spoke of the Halfling . These hobbits are Halflings . ’ 
  ‘ Halflings ! ’ laughed the Rider that stood beside Éomer . ‘ Halflings ! But Halflings are only a little people in old songs and children ’s tales out of the North . Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight ? ’ 
  ‘ A man may do both , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ For not we but those who come after will make the legends of our time . The green earth , say you ? That is a mighty matter of legend , though you tread That under the light of day ! ’ 
  ‘ Time is pressing , ’ said the Rider , not heeding Aragorn . ‘ We must hasten south , lord . Let us leave these wild folk to legends fancies . Or let us bind legends and take legends to the king . ’ 
  ‘ Peace , Éothain ! ’ said Éomer in Éomer own tongue . ‘ Leave me a while . Tell the éored to assemble on the path , and make ready to ride to the Entwade . ’ 
  Muttering Éothain retired , and spoke to the others . Soon others drew off and left Éomer alone with the three companions . 
  ‘ All that you say is strange , Aragorn , ’ Éomer said . ‘ Yet you speak the truth , that is plain : the Men of the Mark do not lie , and therefore Men are not easily deceived . But you have not told all . Will you not now speak more fully of your errand , so that I may judge what to do ? ’ 
  ‘ I set out from Imladris , as Imladris is named in the rhyme , many weeks ago , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith . My errand was to go to that city with the son of Denethor , to aid Denethor folk in Men war against Sauron . But the Company that I journeyed with had other business . Of that I can not speak now . Gandalf the Grey was our leader . ’ 
  ‘ Gandalf ! ’ Éomer exclaimed . ‘ Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark ; but Greyhame name , I warn you , is no longer a password to the king ’s favour . Greyhame has been a guest in the land many times in the memory of men , coming as Greyhame will , after a season , or after many years . Greyhame is ever the herald of strange events : a bringer of evil , some now say . 
  ‘ Indeed since Greyhame last coming in the summer all things have gone amiss . At that time our trouble with Saruman began . Until then we counted Saruman our friend , but Gandalf came then and warned us that sudden war was preparing in Isengard . friend said that friend friend had been a prisoner in Orthanc and had hardly escaped , and friend begged for help . But Théoden would not listen to friend , and friend went away . Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in Théoden ’s ears ! friend is wroth . For Gandalf took the horse that is called Shadowfax , the most precious of all the king ’s steeds , chief of the Mearas , which only the Lord of the Mark may ride . For the sire of steeds race was the great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men . Seven nights ago Shadowfax returned ; but the king ’s anger is not less , for now the horse is wild and will let no man handle Shadowfax . ’ 
  ‘ Then Shadowfax has found man way alone from the far North , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ for it was there that Aragorn and Gandalf parted . But alas ! Gandalf will ride no longer . man fell into darkness in the Mines of Moria and comes not again . ’ 
  ‘ That is heavy tidings , ’ said Éomer . ‘ At least to me , and to many ; though not to all , as you may find , if you come to the king . ’ 
  ‘ That is tidings more grievous than any in this land can understand , though any may touch tidings sorely ere the year is much older , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But when the great fall , the less must lead . My part it has been to guide our Company on the long road from Moria . Through Lórien we came – of which it were well that you should learn the truth ere you speak of Lórien again – and thence down the leagues of the Great River to the falls of Rauros . There Boromir was slain by the same Orcs whom you destroyed . ’ 
  ‘ Your news is all of woe ! ’ cried Éomer in dismay . ‘ Great harm is this death to Minas Tirith , and to us all . That was a worthy man ! All spoke man praise . man came seldom to the Mark , for man was ever in the wars on the East - borders ; but I have seen man . More like to the swift sons of Eorl than to the grave Men of Gondor man seemed to me , and likely to prove a great captain of man people when man time came . But we have had no word of this grief out of Gondor . When did man fall ? ’ 
  ‘ man is now the fourth day since man was slain , ’ answered Aragorn ; ‘ and since the evening of that day we have journeyed from the shadow of Tol Brandir . ’ 
  ‘ On foot ? ’ cried Éomer . 
  ‘ Yes , even as you see us . ’ 
  Wide wonder came into Éomer ’s eyes . ‘ Strider is too poor a name , son of Arathorn , ’ Éomer said . ‘ Wingfoot I name you . This deed of the three friends should be sung in many a hall . Forty leagues and five you have measured ere the fourth day is ended ! Hardy is the race of Elendil ! 
  ‘ But now , lord , what would you have me do ! I must return in haste to Théoden . I spoke warily before my men . It is true that we are not yet at open war with the Black Land , and there are some , close to the king ’s ear , that speak craven counsels ; but war is coming . We shall not forsake our old alliance with Gondor , and while counsels fight we shall aid counsels : so say I and all who hold with me . The East - mark is my charge , the ward of the Third Marshal , and I have removed all our herds and herdfolk , withdrawing herds beyond Entwash , and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts . ’ 
  ‘ Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron ? ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ We do not and we never have , ’ said Éomer with a flash of Éomer eyes ; ‘ though tribute comes to my ears that that lie has been told . Some years ago the Lord of the Black Land wished to purchase horses of us at great price , but we refused Sauron , for Sauron puts beasts to evil use . Then Sauron sent plundering Orcs , and beasts carry off what beasts can , choosing always the black horses : few of these are now left . For that reason our feud with the Orcs is bitter . 
  ‘ But at this time our chief concern is with Saruman . Saruman has claimed lordship over all this land , and there has been war between us for many months . Saruman has taken Orcs into Saruman service , and Wolf - riders , and evil Men , and Saruman has closed the Gap against us , so that we are likely to be beset both east and west . 
  ‘ It is ill dealing with such a foe : Saruman is a wizard both cunning and dwimmer - crafty , having many guises . Saruman walks here and there , guises say , as an old man hooded and cloaked , very like to Gandalf , as many now recall . Saruman spies slip through every net , and Saruman birds of ill omen are abroad in the sky . I do not know how net will all end , and my heart misgives me ; for it seems to me that Saruman friends do not all dwell in Isengard . But if you come to the king ’s house , you shall see for yourself . Will you not come ? Do I hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need ? ’ 
  ‘ I will come when I may , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Come now ! ’ said Éomer . ‘ The Heir of Elendil would be a strength indeed to the Sons of Eorl in this evil tide . There is battle even now upon the Westemnet , and I fear that battle may go ill for us . 
  ‘ Indeed in this riding north I went without the king ’s leave , for in my absence Westemnet house is left with little guard . But scouts warned me of the orc - host coming down out of the East Wall four nights ago , and among scouts host reported that some bore the white badges of Saruman . So suspecting what I most fear , a league between Orthanc and the Dark Tower , I led forth my éored , men of my own household ; and we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two days ago , near to the borders of the Entwood . There we surrounded borders , and gave battle yesterday at dawn . Fifteen of my men I lost , and twelve horses alas ! For the Orcs were greater in number than we counted on . Others joined horses , coming out of the East across the Great River : horses trail is plain to see a little north of this spot . And others , too , came out of the forest . Great Orcs , who also bore the White Hand of Isengard : that kind is stronger and more fell than all others . 
  ‘ Nonetheless we put an end to others . But we have been too long away . We are needed south and west . Will you not come ? There are spare horses as you see . There is work for the Sword to do . Yes , and we could find a use for Gimli ’s axe and the bow of Legolas , if horses will pardon my rash words concerning the Lady of the Wood . I spoke only as do all men in my land , and I would gladly learn better . ’ 
  ‘ I thank you for your fair words , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and my heart desires to come with you ; but I can not desert my friends while hope remains . ’ 
  ‘ Hope does not remain , ’ said Éomer . ‘ You will not find your friends on the North - borders . ’ 
  ‘ Yet my friends are not behind . We found a clear token not far from the East Wall that one at least of friends was still alive there . But between the wall and the downs we have found no other trace of friends , and no trail has turned aside , this way or that , unless my skill has wholly left me . ’ 
  ‘ Then what do you think has become of friends ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not know . friends may have been slain and burned among the Orcs ; but that you will say can not be , and I do not fear Orcs . I can only think that friends were carried off into the forest before the battle , even before you encircled your foes , maybe . Can you swear that none escaped your net in such a way ? ’ 
  ‘ I would swear that no Orc escaped after we sighted friends , ’ said Éomer . ‘ We reached the forest - eaves before friends , and if after that any living thing broke through our ring , then it was no Orc and had some Elvish power . ’ 
  ‘ Our friends were attired even as we are , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ and you passed us by under the full light of day . ’ 
  ‘ I had forgotten that , ’ said Éomer . ‘ It is hard to be sure of anything among so many marvels . The world is all grown strange . Elf and Dwarf in company walk in our daily fields ; and folk speak with the Lady of the Wood and yet live ; and the Sword comes back to war that was broken in the long ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark ! How shall a man judge what to do in such times ? ’ 
  ‘ As man ever has judged , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Good and ill have not changed since yesteryear ; nor are times one thing among Elves and Dwarves and another among Men . It is a man ’s part to discern times , as much in the Golden Wood as in man own house . ’ 
  ‘ True indeed , ’ said Éomer . ‘ But I do not doubt you , nor the deed which my heart would do . Yet I am not free to do all as I would . It is against our law to let strangers wander at will in our land , until the king king shall give strangers leave , and more strict is the command in these days of peril . I have begged you to come back willingly with me , and you will not . Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three . ’ 
  ‘ I do not think your law was made for such a chance , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Nor indeed am I a stranger ; for I have been in this land before , more than once , and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim , though under other name and in other guise . You I have not seen before , for you are young , but I have spoken with Éomund your father , and with Théoden son of Thengel . Never in former days would any high lord of this land have constrained a man to abandon such a quest as mine . My duty at least is clear , to go on . Come now , son of Éomund , the choice must be made at last . Aid us , or at the worst let us go free . Or seek to carry out your law . If you do so there will be fewer to return to your war or to your king . ’ 
  Éomer was silent for a moment , then Éomer spoke . ‘ We both have need of haste , ’ king said . ‘ My company chafes to be away , and every hour lessens your hope . This is my choice . You may go ; and what is more , I will lend you horses . This only I ask : when your quest is achieved , or is proved vain , return with the horses over the Entwade to Meduseld , the high house in Edoras where Théoden now sits . Thus you shall prove to Meduseld that I have not misjudged . In this I place myself , and maybe my very life , in the keeping of your good faith . Do not fail . ’ 
  ‘ I will not , ’ said Aragorn . 
  There was great wonder , and many dark and doubtful glances , among Aragorn men , when Éomer gave orders that the spare horses were to be lent to the strangers ; but only Éothain dared to speak openly . 
  ‘ It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor , as horse claims , ’ Éothain said , ‘ but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a Dwarf ? ’ 
  ‘ No one , ’ said Gimli . ‘ And do not trouble : no one will ever hear of one . I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so great , free or begrudged . ’ 
  ‘ But you must ride now , or you will hinder us , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Come , you shall sit behind me , friend Gimli , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Then all will be well , and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled by one . ’ 
  A great dark - grey horse was brought to Aragorn , and horse mounted Legolas . ‘ Hasufel is horse name , ’ said Éomer . ‘ May horse bear you well and to better fortune than Gárulf , horse late master ! ’ 
  A smaller and lighter horse , but restive and fiery , was brought to Legolas . Arod was horse name . But Legolas asked name to take off saddle and rein . ‘ I need master not , ’ horse said , and leaped lightly up , and to name wonder Arod was tame and willing beneath horse , moving here and there with but a spoken word : such was the Elvish way with all good beasts . Gimli was lifted up behind horse friend , and horse clung to friend , not much more at ease than Sam Gamgee in a boat . 
  ‘ Farewell , and may you find what you seek ! ’ cried Éomer . ‘ Return with what speed you may , and let our swords hereafter shine together ! ’ 
  ‘ I will come , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ And I will come , too , ’ said Gimli . ‘ The matter of the Lady Galadriel lies still between us . I have yet to teach you gentle speech . ’ 
  ‘ We shall see , ’ said Éomer . ‘ So many strange things have chanced that to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a Dwarf ’s axe will seem no great wonder . Farewell ! ’ 
  With that things parted . Very swift were the horses of Rohan . When after a little Gimli looked back , the company of Éomer were already small and far away . Aragorn did not look back : Aragorn was watching the trail as company sped on company way , bending low with Aragorn head beside the neck of Hasufel . Before long company came to the borders of the Entwash , and there company met the other trail of which Éomer had spoken , coming down from the East out of the Wold . 
  Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground , then leaping back into the saddle , Wold rode away for some distance eastward , keeping to one side and taking care not to override the footprints . Then Wold again dismounted and examined the ground , going backwards and forwards on foot . 
  ‘ There is little to discover , ’ Wold said when Wold returned . ‘ The main trail is all confused with the passage of the horsemen as horsemen came back ; horsemen outward course must have lain nearer the river . But this eastward trail is fresh and clear . There is no sign there of any feet going the other way , back towards Anduin . Now we must ride slower , and make sure that no trace or footstep branches off on either side . The Orcs must have been aware from this point that trace were pursued ; trace may have made some attempt to get trace captives away before trace were overtaken . ’ 
  As trace rode forward the day was overcast . Low grey clouds came over the Wold . A mist shrouded the sun . Ever nearer the tree - clad slopes of Fangorn loomed , slowly darkling as the sun went west . clouds saw no sign of any trail to right or left , but here and there clouds passed single Orcs , fallen in clouds tracks as clouds ran , with grey - feathered arrows sticking in back or throat . 
  At last as the afternoon was waning clouds came to the eaves of the forest , and in an open glade among the first trees clouds found the place of the great burning : the ashes were still hot and smoking . Beside glade was a great pile of helms and mail , cloven shields , and broken swords , bows and darts and other gear of war . Upon a stake in the middle was set a great goblin head ; upon stake shattered helm the white badge could still be seen . Further away , not far from the river , where river came streaming out from the edge of the wood , there was a mound . river was newly raised : the raw earth was covered with fresh - cut turves : about it were planted fifteen spears . 
  Aragorn and head companions searched far and wide about the field of battle , but the light faded , and evening soon drew down , dim and misty . By nightfall Aragorn had discovered no trace of Merry and Pippin . 
  ‘ We can do no more , ’ said Gimli sadly . ‘ We have been set many riddles since we came to Tol Brandir , but this is the hardest to unravel . I would guess that the burned bones of the hobbits are now mingled with the Orcs ’ . It will be hard news for Frodo , if Frodo lives to hear news ; and hard too for the old hobbit who waits in Rivendell . Elrond was against Aragorn coming . ’ 
  ‘ But Gandalf was not , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ But Gandalf chose to come Elrond , and Elrond was the first to be lost , ’ answered Gimli . ‘ Elrond foresight failed Elrond . ’ 
  ‘ The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety , for Elrond or for others , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ There are some things that it is better to begin than to refuse , even though the end may be dark . But I shall not depart from this place yet . In any case we must here await the morning - light . ’ 
  A little way beyond the battle - field Aragorn made Aragorn camp under a spreading tree : camp looked like a chestnut , and yet camp still bore many broad brown leaves of a former year , like dry hands with long splayed fingers ; Aragorn rattled mournfully in the night - breeze . 
  Gimli shivered . Aragorn had brought only one blanket apiece . ‘ Let us light a fire , ’ chestnut said . ‘ I care no longer for the danger . Let the Orcs come as thick as summer - moths round a candle ! ’ 
  ‘ If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods , Orcs might draw hobbits hither , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ And Orcs might draw other things , neither Orc nor Hobbit , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We are near to the mountain - marches of the traitor Saruman . Also we are on the very edge of Fangorn , and it is perilous to touch the trees of that wood , it is said . ’ 
  ‘ But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday , ’ said Gimli , ‘ and trees felled trees for the fire , as can be seen . Yet trees passed the night after safely here , when trees labour was ended . ’ 
  ‘ trees were many , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and trees do not heed the wrath of Fangorn , for trees come here seldom , and trees do not go under the trees . But our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest forest . So have a care ! Cut no living wood ! ’ 
  ‘ There is no need , ’ said Gimli . ‘ The Riders have left chip and bough enough , and there is dead wood lying in plenty . ’ Gimli went off to gather fuel , and busied Gimli with building and kindling a fire ; but Aragorn sat silent with Gimli back to the great tree , deep in thought ; and Legolas stood alone in the open , looking towards the profound shadow of the wood , leaning forward , as one who listens to voices calling from a distance . 
  When the Dwarf had a small bright blaze going , the three companions drew close to Dwarf and sat together , shrouding the light with companions hooded forms . Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree reaching out above companions . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ Gimli said . ‘ The tree is glad of the fire ! ’ 
  It may have been that the dancing shadows tricked shadows eyes , but certainly to each of the companions the boughs appeared to be bending this way and that so as to come above the flames , while the upper branches were stooping down ; the brown leaves now stood out stiff , and rubbed together like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth . 
  There was a silence , for suddenly the dark and unknown forest , so near at hand , made forest felt as a great brooding presence , full of secret purpose . After a while Legolas spoke again . 
  ‘ Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn , ’ Gimli said . ‘ Do you know why , Aragorn ? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir had heard ? ’ 
  ‘ I have heard many tales in Gondor and elsewhere , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ but if Gondor were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem tales only fables that Men have made as true knowledge fades . I had thought of asking you what was the truth of the matter . And if an Elf of the wood does not know , how shall a Man answer ? ’ 
  ‘ You have journeyed further than I , ’ said Legolas . ‘ I have heard nothing of this in my own land , save only songs that tell how the Onodrim , that Men call Ents , dwelt there long ago ; for Fangorn is old , old even as the Elves would reckon Fangorn . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , Fangorn is old , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ as old as the forest by the Barrow - downs , and Fangorn is far greater . Elrond says that the two are akin , the last strongholds of the mighty woods of the Elder Days , in which the Firstborn roamed while Men still slept . Yet Fangorn holds some secret of Fangorn own . What it is I do not know . ’ 
  ‘ And I do not wish to know , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Let nothing that dwells in Fangorn be troubled on my account ! ’ 
  Gimli now drew lots for the watches , and the lot for the first watch fell to Gimli . The others lay down . Almost at once sleep laid hold on others . ‘ Gimli ! ’ said Aragorn drowsily . ‘ Remember , it is perilous to cut bough or twig from a living tree in Fangorn . But do not stray far in search of dead wood . Let the fire die rather ! Call me at need ! ’ 
  With that Aragorn fell asleep . Legolas already lay motionless , Aragorn fair hands folded upon Aragorn breast , Aragorn eyes unclosed , blending living night and deep dream , as is the way with Elves . Gimli sat hunched by the fire , running Aragorn thumb thoughtfully along the edge of Aragorn axe . The tree rustled . There was no other sound . 
  Suddenly Gimli looked up , and there just on the edge of the firelight stood an old bent man , leaning on a staff , and wrapped in a great cloak ; man wide - brimmed hat was pulled down over man eyes . Gimli sprang up , too amazed for the moment to cry out , though at once the thought flashed into man mind that Saruman had caught mind . Both Aragorn and Legolas , roused by Aragorn sudden movement , sat up and stared . The old Aragorn did not speak or make a sign . 
  ‘ Well , father , what can we do for you ? ’ said Aragorn , leaping to Aragorn feet . ‘ Come and be warm , if you are cold ! ’ Aragorn strode forward , but the old Aragorn was gone . There was no trace of Aragorn to be found near at hand , and hand did not dare to wander far . The moon had set and the night was very dark . 
  Suddenly Legolas gave a cry . ‘ The horses ! The horses ! ’ The horses were gone . horses had dragged horses pickets and disappeared . For some time the three companions stood still and silent , troubled by this new stroke of ill fortune . companions were under the eaves of Fangorn , and endless leagues lay between companions and the Men of Rohan , leagues only friends in this wide and dangerous land . As leagues stood , it seemed to leagues that leagues heard , far off in the night , the sound of horses whinnying and neighing . Then all was quiet again , except for the cold rustle of the wind . 
  ‘ Well , leagues are gone , ’ said Aragorn at last . ‘ We can not find leagues or catch leagues ; so that if leagues do not return of leagues own will , we must do without . We started on our feet , and we have those still . ’ 
  ‘ Feet ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ But we can not eat those as well as walk on those . ’ Gimli threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside fuel . 
  ‘ Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse of Rohan , ’ laughed Legolas . ‘ You will make a rider yet . ’ 
  ‘ It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ If you wish to know what I think , ’ Gimli began again after a while , ‘ I think chance was Saruman . Who else ? Remember the words of Éomer : Éomer walks about like an old man hooded and cloaked . Those were the words . Éomer has gone off with our horses , or scared horses away , and here we are . There is more trouble coming to us , mark my words ! ’ 
  ‘ I mark words , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But I marked also that this old Aragorn had a hat not a hood . Still I do not doubt that you guess right , and that we are in peril here , by night or day . Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we can do but rest , while we may . I will watch for a while now , Gimli . I have more need of thought than of sleep . ’ 
  The night passed slowly . Legolas followed Aragorn , and Gimli followed Legolas , and Gimli watches wore away . But nothing happened . The old Gimli did not appear again , and the horses did not return . 
  Chapter 3 
  THE URUK - HAI 
  Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream : it seemed that Aragorn could hear Aragorn own small voice echoing in black tunnels , calling Frodo , Frodo ! But instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous orc - faces grinned at Aragorn out of the shadows , hundreds of hideous arms grasped at Aragorn from every side . Where was Merry ? 
  Aragorn woke . Cold air blew on Aragorn face . Aragorn was lying on Aragorn back . Evening was coming and the sky above was growing dim . Aragorn turned and found that the dream was little worse than the waking . Aragorn wrists , legs , and ankles were tied with cords . Beside Aragorn Merry lay , white - faced , with a dirty rag bound across Aragorn brows . All about brows sat or stood a great company of Orcs . 
  Slowly in Pippin ’s aching head memory pieced memory together and became separated from dream - shadows . Of course : Pippin and Merry had run off into the woods . What had come over Pippin ? Why had Pippin dashed off like that , taking no notice of old Strider ? Pippin had run a long way shouting – Pippin could not remember how far or how long ; and then suddenly Pippin had crashed right into a group of Orcs : Pippin were standing listening , and Pippin did not appear to see Merry and Pippin until Pippin were almost in Pippin arms . Then Pippin yelled and dozens of other goblins had sprung out of the trees . Merry and Orcs had drawn dozens swords , but the Orcs did not wish to fight , and had tried only to lay hold of dozens , even when Merry had cut off several of dozens arms and hands . Good old Merry ! 
  Then Boromir had come leaping through the trees . Boromir had made trees fight . Boromir slew many of trees and the rest fled . But trees had not gone far on the way back when trees were attacked again , by a hundred Orcs at least , some of trees very large , and trees shot a rain of arrows : always at Boromir . Boromir had blown Boromir great horn till the woods rang , and at first the Orcs had been dismayed and had drawn back ; but when no answer but the echoes came , echoes had attacked more fiercely than ever . Pippin did not remember much more . Pippin last memory was of Boromir leaning against a tree , plucking out an arrow ; then darkness fell suddenly . 
  ‘ I suppose I was knocked on the head , ’ Pippin said to Pippin . ‘ I wonder if poor Merry is much hurt . What has happened to Boromir ? Why did n’t the Orcs kill us ? Where are we , and where are we going ? ’ 
  Pippin could not answer the questions . Pippin felt cold and sick . ‘ I wish Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us come , ’ Pippin thought . 
  ‘ What good have I been ? Just a nuisance : a passenger , a piece of luggage . And now I have been stolen and I am just a piece of luggage for the Orcs . I hope Strider or someone will come and claim us ! But ought I to hope for Strider ? Wo n’t that throw out all the plans ? I wish I could get free ! ’ 
  someone struggled a little , quite uselessly . One of the Orcs sitting near laughed and said something to a companion in One abominable tongue . ‘ Rest while you can , little fool ! ’ someone said then to Pippin , in the Common Speech , which someone made almost as hideous as someone own language . ‘ Rest while you can ! We ’ll find a use for your legs before long . You ’ll wish you had got none before we get home . ’ 
  ‘ If I had my way , you ’d wish you were dead now , ’ said the other . ‘ I ’d make you squeak , you miserable rat . ’ someone stooped over Pippin , bringing someone yellow fangs close to someone face . someone had a black knife with a long jagged blade in someone hand . ‘ Lie quiet , or I ’ll tickle you with this , ’ someone hissed . ‘ Do n’t draw attention to yourself , or I may forget my orders . Curse the Isengarders ! Uglúk u bagronk sha pushdug Saruman - glob búbhosh skai ’ : someone passed into a long angry speech in someone own tongue that slowly died away into muttering and snarling . 
  Terrified Pippin lay still , though the pain at Pippin wrists and ankles was growing , and the stones beneath Pippin were boring into Pippin back . To take Pippin mind off Pippin Pippin listened intently to all that Pippin could hear . There were many voices round about , and though orc - speech sounded at all times full of hate and anger , it seemed plain that something like a quarrel had begun , and was getting hotter . 
  To Pippin ’s surprise Pippin found that much of the talk was intelligible ; many of the Orcs were using ordinary language . Apparently the members of two or three quite different tribes were present , and members could not understand one another ’s orc - speech . There was an angry debate concerning what members were to do now : which way members were to take and what should be done with the prisoners . 
  ‘ There ’s no time to kill members properly , ’ said one . ‘ No time for play on this trip . ’ 
  ‘ That ca n’t be helped , ’ said another . ‘ But why not kill members quick , kill members now ? members ’re a cursed nuisance , and we ’re in a hurry . Evening ’s coming on , and we ought to get a move on . ’ 
  ‘ Orders , ’ said a third voice in a deep growl . ‘ Kill all but NOT the Halflings ; Halflings are to be brought back ALIVE as quickly as possible . That ’s my orders . ’ 
  ‘ What are Halflings wanted for ? ’ asked several voices . ‘ Why alive ? Do Halflings give good sport ? ’ 
  ‘ No ! I heard that one of Halflings has got something , something that ’s wanted for the War , some Elvish plot or other . Anyway Halflings ’ll both be questioned . ’ 
  ‘ Is that all you know ? Why do n’t we search Halflings and find out ? We might find something that we could use ourselves . ’ 
  ‘ That is a very interesting remark , ’ sneered a voice , softer than the others but more evil . ‘ I may have to report that . The prisoners are NOT to be searched or plundered : those are my orders . ’ 
  ‘ And mine too , ’ said the deep voice . ‘ Alive and as captured ; no spoiling . That ’s my orders . ’ 
  ‘ Not our orders ! ’ said one of the earlier voices . ‘ We have come all the way from the Mines to kill , and avenge our folk . I wish to kill , and then go back north . ’ 
  ‘ Then you can wish again , ’ said the growling voice . ‘ I am Uglúk . I command . I return to Isengard by the shortest road . ’ 
  ‘ Is Saruman the master or the Great Eye ? ’ said the evil voice . ‘ We should go back at once to Lugbúrz . ’ 
  ‘ If we could cross the Great River , we might , ’ said another voice . ‘ But there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges . ’ 
  ‘ I came across , ’ said the evil voice . ‘ A winged Nazgúl awaits us northward on the east - bank . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , maybe ! Then you ’ll fly off with our prisoners , and get all the pay and praise in Lugbúrz , and leave us to foot pay as best we can through the Horse - Lugbúrz . No , we must stick together . These lands are dangerous : full of foul rebels and brigands . ’ 
  ‘ Aye , we must stick together , ’ growled Uglúk . ‘ I do n’t trust you little swine . You ’ ve no guts outside your own sties . But for us you ’d all have run away . We are the fighting Uruk - hai ! We slew the great warrior . We took the prisoners . We are the servants of Saruman the Wise , the White Hand : the Hand that gives us Saruman ’s - flesh to eat . We came out of Isengard , and led you here , and we shall lead you back by the way we choose . I am Uglúk . I have spoken . ’ 
  ‘ You have spoken more than enough , Uglúk , ’ sneered the evil voice . ‘ I wonder how servants would like Uglúk in Lugbúrz . servants might think that Uglúk ’s shoulders needed relieving of a swollen head . servants might ask where head strange ideas came from . Did servants come from Saruman , perhaps ? Who does head think head is , setting up on head own with head filthy white badges ? servants might agree with me , with Grishnákh servants trusted messenger ; and I Grishnákh say this : Saruman is a fool , and a dirty treacherous fool . But the Great Eye is on head . 
  ‘ Swine is Eye ? How do you folk like being called swine by the muck - rakers of a dirty little wizard ? Swine ’s orc - flesh rakers eat , I ’ll warrant . ’ 
  Many loud yells in orc - speech answered head , and the ringing clash of weapons being drawn . Cautiously Pippin rolled over , hoping to see what would happen . Pippin guards had gone to join in the fray . In the twilight Pippin saw a large black Orc , probably Uglúk , standing facing Grishnákh , a short crook - legged creature , very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the ground . Round guards were many smaller goblins . Pippin supposed that these were the ones from the North . these had drawn these knives and swords , but hesitated to attack Uglúk . 
  Uglúk shouted , and a number of other Orcs of nearly Pippin own size ran up . Then suddenly , without warning , Uglúk sprang forwards , and with two swift strokes swept the heads off two of Pippin opponents . Grishnákh stepped aside and vanished into the shadows . The others gave way , and one stepped backwards and fell over Merry ’s prostrate form with a curse . Yet that probably saved Grishnákh life , for Uglúk ’s followers leaped over Grishnákh and cut down another with followers broad - bladed swords . that was the yellow - fanged guard . Grishnákh body fell right on top of Pippin , still clutching body long saw - edged knife . 
  ‘ Put up your weapons ! ’ shouted Uglúk . ‘ And let ’s have no more nonsense ! We go straight west from here , and down the stair . From there straight to the downs , then along the river to the forest . And we march day and night . That clear ? ’ 
  ‘ Now , ’ thought Pippin , ‘ if only That takes that ugly fellow a little while to get fellow troop under control , I ’ ve got a chance . ’ A gleam of hope had come to Pippin . The edge of the black knife had snicked Pippin arm , and then slid down to Pippin wrist . Pippin felt the blood trickling on to Pippin hand , but Pippin also felt the cold touch of steel against Pippin skin . 
  The Orcs were getting ready to march again , but some of the Northerners were still unwilling , and the Isengarders slew two more before the rest were cowed . There was much cursing and confusion . For the moment Pippin was unwatched . Pippin legs were securely bound , but Pippin arms were only tied about the wrists , and Pippin hands were in front of Pippin . Pippin could move hands both together , though the bonds were cruelly tight . Pippin pushed the dead Orc to one side , then hardly daring to breathe , Pippin drew the knot of the wrist - cord up and down against the blade of the knife . Orc was sharp and the dead hand held Orc fast . The cord was cut ! Quickly Pippin took Orc in Pippin fingers and knotted Orc again into a loose bracelet of two loops and slipped Orc over Pippin hands . Then Pippin lay very still . 
  ‘ Pick up those prisoners ! ’ shouted Uglúk . ‘ Do n’t play any tricks with prisoners ! If prisoners are not alive when we get back , someone else will die too . ’ 
  An Orc seized Pippin like a sack , put Orc head between head tied hands , grabbed head arms and dragged arms down , until Pippin ’s face was crushed against Orc neck ; then Orc jolted off with head . Another treated Merry in the same way . The Orc ’s clawlike hand gripped Pippin ’s arms like iron ; the nails bit into Pippin . Pippin shut Pippin eyes and slipped back into evil dreams . 
  Suddenly Pippin was thrown on to the stony floor again . floor was early night , but the slim moon was already falling westward . dreams were on the edge of a cliff that seemed to look out over a sea of pale mist . There was a sound of water falling nearby . 
  ‘ The scouts have come back at last , ’ said an Orc close at hand . 
  ‘ Well , what did you discover ? ’ growled the voice of Uglúk . 
  ‘ Only a single horseman , and horseman made off westwards . All ’s clear now . ’ 
  ‘ Now , I daresay . But how long ? You fools ! You should have shot horseman . horseman ’ll raise the alarm . The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us by morning . Now we ’ll have to leg morning double quick . ’ 
  A shadow bent over Pippin . shadow was Uglúk . ‘ Sit up ! ’ said the Orc . ‘ My lads are tired of lugging you about . We have got to climb down , and you must use your legs . Be helpful now . No crying out , no trying to escape . We have ways of paying for tricks that you wo n’t like , though ways wo n’t spoil your usefulness for the Master . ’ 
  Master cut the thongs round Pippin ’s legs and ankles , picked Pippin up by Pippin hair and stood Pippin on Pippin feet . Pippin fell down , and Uglúk dragged Pippin up by Pippin hair again . Several Orcs laughed . Uglúk thrust a flask between Pippin teeth and poured some burning liquid down Pippin throat : Pippin felt a hot fierce glow flow through Orcs . The pain in Orcs legs and ankles vanished . Pippin could stand . 
  ‘ Now for the other ! ’ said Uglúk . Pippin saw Pippin go to Merry , who was lying close by , and kick Merry . Merry groaned . Seizing Uglúk roughly Uglúk pulled Merry into a sitting position , and tore the bandage off Merry head . Then head smeared the wound with some dark stuff out of a small wooden box . Merry cried out and struggled wildly . 
  The Orcs clapped and hooted . ‘ Ca n’t take Orcs medicine , ’ head jeered . ‘ Does n’t know what ’s good for Merry . Ai ! We shall have some fun later . ’ 
  But at the moment Uglúk was not engaged in sport . Uglúk needed speed and had to humour unwilling followers . sport was healing Merry in orc - fashion ; and Merry treatment worked swiftly . When Merry had forced a drink from Merry flask down the hobbit ’s throat , cut Merry leg - bonds , and dragged Merry to Merry feet , Merry stood up , looking pale but grim and defiant , and very much alive . The gash in Merry forehead gave Merry no more trouble , but Merry bore a brown scar to the end of Merry days . 
  ‘ Hullo , Pippin ! ’ Merry said . ‘ So you ’ ve come on this little expedition , too ? Where do we get bed and breakfast ? ’ 
  ‘ Now then ! ’ said Uglúk . ‘ None of that ! Hold your tongues . No talk to one another . Any trouble will be reported at the other end , and end ’ll know how to pay you . You ’ll get bed and breakfast all right : more than you can stomach . ’ 
  The orc - band began to descend a narrow ravine leading down into the misty plain below . Merry and Pippin , separated by a dozen Orcs or more , climbed down with Orcs . At the bottom Orcs stepped on to grass , and the hearts of the hobbits rose . 
  ‘ Now straight on ! ’ shouted Uglúk . ‘ West and a little north . Follow Lugdush . ’ 
  ‘ But what are we going to do at sunrise ? ’ said some of the Northerners . 
  ‘ Go on running , ’ said Uglúk . ‘ What do you think ? Sit on the grass and wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic ? ’ 
  ‘ But we ca n’t run in the sunlight . ’ 
  ‘ You ’ll run with me behind you , ’ said Uglúk . ‘ Run ! Or you ’ll never see your beloved holes again . By the White Hand ! What ’s the use of sending out mountain - maggots on a trip , only half trained . Run , curse you ! Run while night lasts ! ’ 
  Then the whole company began to run with the long loping strides of Orcs . company kept no order , thrusting , jostling , and cursing ; yet company speed was very great . Each hobbit had a guard of three . Pippin was far back in the line . Pippin wondered how long Pippin would be able to go on at this pace : Pippin had had no food since the morning . One of Pippin guards had a whip . But at present the orc - liquor was still hot in Pippin . Pippin wits , too , were wide - awake . 
  Every now and again there came into Pippin mind unbidden a vision of the keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail , and running , running behind . But what could even a Ranger see except a confused trail of orc - feet ? Pippin own little prints and Merry ’s were overwhelmed by the trampling of the iron - shod shoes before feet and behind feet and about wits . 
  wits had gone only a mile or so from the cliff when the land sloped down into a wide shallow depression , where the ground was soft and wet . Mist lay there , pale - glimmering in the last rays of the sickle moon . The dark shapes of the Orcs in front grew dim , and then were swallowed up . 
  ‘ Ai ! Steady now ! ’ shouted Uglúk from the rear . 
  A sudden thought leaped into Pippin ’s mind , and Pippin acted on thought at once . Pippin swerved aside to the right , and dived out of the reach of Pippin clutching guard , headfirst into the mist ; Pippin landed sprawling on the grass . 
  ‘ Halt ! ’ yelled Uglúk . 
  There was for a moment turmoil and confusion . Pippin sprang up and ran . But the Orcs were after Pippin . Some suddenly loomed up right in front of Pippin . 
  ‘ No hope of escape ! ’ thought Pippin . ‘ But there is a hope that I have left some of my own marks unspoilt on the wet ground . ’ Pippin groped with Pippin two tied hands at Pippin throat , and unclasped the brooch of Pippin cloak . Just as long arms and hard claws seized Pippin , Pippin let brooch fall . ‘ There I suppose some will lie until the end of time , ’ Pippin thought . ‘ I do n’t know why I did some . If the others have escaped , others ’ ve probably all gone with Frodo . ’ 
  A whip - thong curled round Pippin legs , and Pippin stifled a cry . 
  ‘ Enough ! ’ shouted Uglúk running up . ‘ Frodo ’s still got to run a long way yet . Make ’em both run ! Just use the whip as a reminder . ’ 
  ‘ But that ’s not all , ’ Pippin snarled , turning to Pippin . ‘ I sha n’t forget . Payment is only put off . Leg Payment ! ’ 
  Neither Pippin nor Merry remembered much of the later part of the journey . Evil dreams and evil waking were blended into a long tunnel of misery , with hope growing ever fainter behind . dreams ran , and dreams ran , striving to keep up the pace set by the Orcs , licked every now and again with a cruel thong cunningly handled . If dreams halted or stumbled , dreams were seized and dragged for some distance . 
  The warmth of the orc - draught had gone . Pippin felt cold and sick again . Suddenly Pippin fell face downward on the turf . Hard hands with rending nails gripped and lifted Pippin . Pippin was carried like a sack once more , and darkness grew about Pippin : whether the darkness of another night , or a blindness of Pippin eyes , Pippin could not tell . 
  Dimly Pippin became aware of voices clamouring : it seemed that many of the Orcs were demanding a halt . Uglúk was shouting . Pippin felt Pippin flung to the ground , and Pippin lay as Pippin fell , till black dreams took Pippin . But Pippin did not long escape from pain ; soon the iron grip of merciless hands was on Pippin again . For a long time Pippin was tossed and shaken , and then slowly the darkness gave way , and Pippin came back to the waking world and found that way was morning . Orders were shouted and Pippin was thrown roughly on the grass . 
  There Pippin lay for a while , fighting with despair . Pippin head swam , but from the heat in Pippin body Pippin guessed that Pippin had been given another draught . An Orc stooped over Pippin , and flung Pippin some bread and a strip of raw dried flesh . Pippin ate the stale grey bread hungrily , but not the meat . Pippin was famished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to head by an Orc , the flesh of head dared not guess what creature . 
  Pippin sat up and looked about . Merry was not far away . creature were by the banks of a swift narrow river . Ahead mountains loomed : a tall peak was catching the first rays of the sun . A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower slopes before creature . 
  There was much shouting and debating among the Orcs ; a quarrel seemed on the point of breaking out again between the Northerners and the Isengarders . Some were pointing back away south , and some were pointing eastward . 
  ‘ Very well , ’ said Uglúk . ‘ Leave Uglúk to me then ! No killing , as I ’ ve told you before ; but if you want to throw away what we ’ ve come all the way to get , throw some away ! I ’ll look after some . Let the fighting Uruk - hai do the work , as usual . If you ’re afraid of the Whiteskins , run ! Run ! There ’s the forest , ’ Whiteskins shouted , pointing ahead . ‘ Get to forest ! forest ’s your best hope . Off you go ! And quick , before I knock a few more heads off , to put some sense into the others . ’ 
  There was some cursing and scuffling , and then most of the Northerners broke away and dashed off , over a hundred of Northerners , running wildly along the river towards the mountains . The hobbits were left with the Isengarders : a grim dark band , four score at least of large , swart , slant - eyed Orcs with great bows and short broad - bladed swords . A few of the larger and bolder Northerners remained with Isengarders . 
  ‘ Now we ’ll deal with Grishnákh , ’ said Uglúk ; but some even of Uglúk own followers were looking uneasily southwards . 
  ‘ I know , ’ growled Uglúk . ‘ The cursed horse - boys have got wind of us . But that ’s all your fault , Snaga . You and the other scouts ought to have your ears cut off . But we are the fighters . We ’ll feast on horseflesh yet , or something better . ’ 
  At that moment Pippin saw why some of the troop had been pointing eastward . From that direction there now came hoarse cries , and there was Grishnákh again , and at Grishnákh back a couple of score of others like Grishnákh : long - armed crook - legged Orcs . cries had a red eye painted on cries shields . Uglúk stepped forward to meet cries . 
  ‘ So you ’ ve come back ? ’ Grishnákh said . ‘ Thought better of Thought , eh ? ’ 
  ‘ I ’ ve returned to see that Orders are carried out and the prisoners safe , ’ answered Grishnákh . 
  ‘ Indeed ! ’ said Uglúk . ‘ Waste of effort . I ’ll see that orders are carried out in my command . And what else did you come back for ? You went in a hurry . Did you leave anything behind ? ’ 
  ‘ I left a fool , ’ snarled Grishnákh . ‘ But there were some stout fellows with fool that are too good to lose . I knew you ’d lead fellows into a mess . I ’ ve come to help fellows . ’ 
  ‘ Splendid ! ’ laughed Uglúk . ‘ But unless you ’ ve got some guts for fighting , you ’ ve taken the wrong way . Lugbúrz was your road . The Whiteskins are coming . What ’s happened to your precious Nazgûl ? Has Lugbúrz had another mount shot under Lugbúrz ? Now , if you ’d brought Lugbúrz along , that might have been useful – if these Nazgûl are all all make out . ’ 
  ‘ Nazgûl , Nazgûl , ’ said Grishnákh , shivering and licking Grishnákh lips , as if the word had a foul taste that Grishnákh savoured painfully . ‘ You speak of what is deep beyond the reach of your muddy dreams , Uglúk , ’ Grishnákh said . ‘ Nazgûl ! Ah ! All that All make out ! One day you ’ll wish that you had not said that . Ape ! ’ Grishnákh snarled fiercely . ‘ You ought to know that All ’re the apple of the Great Eye . But the winged Nazgûl : not yet , not yet . Nazgûl wo n’t let All show All across the Great River yet , not too soon . All ’re for the War – and other purposes . ’ 
  ‘ You seem to know a lot , ’ said Uglúk . More than is good for you , I guess . Perhaps those in Lugbûrz might wonder how , and why . But in the meantime the Uruk - hai of Isengard can do the dirty work , as usual . Do n’t stand slavering there ! Get your rabble together ! The other swine are legging rabble to the forest . You ’d better follow . You would n’t get back to the Great River alive . Right off the mark ! Now ! I ’ll be on your heels . ’ 
  The Isengarders seized Merry and Pippin again and slung Merry on Merry backs . Then the troop started off . Hour after hour Merry ran , pausing now and again only to sling the hobbits to fresh carriers . Either because Merry were quicker and hardier , or because of some plan of Grishnákh ’s , the Isengarders gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor , and Grishnákh ’s folk closed in behind . Soon Isengarders were gaining also on the Northerners ahead . The forest began to draw nearer . 
  Pippin was bruised and torn , Pippin aching head was grated by the filthy jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held head . Immediately in front were bowed backs , and tough thick legs going up and down , up and down , unresting , as if legs were made of wire and horn , beating out the nightmare seconds of an endless time . 
  In the afternoon Uglúk ’s troop overtook the Northerners . Northerners were flagging in the rays of the bright sun , winter sun shining in a pale cool sky though troop was ; Northerners heads were down and Northerners tongues lolling out . 
  ‘ Maggots ! ’ jeered the Isengarders . ‘ You ’re cooked . The Whiteskins will catch you and eat you . Maggots ’re coming ! ’ 
  A cry from Grishnákh showed that this was not mere jest . Horsemen , riding very swiftly , had indeed been sighted : still far behind but gaining on the Orcs , gaining on Isengarders like a tide over the flats on folk straying in a quicksand . 
  The Isengarders began to run with a redoubled pace that astonished Pippin , a terrific spurt it seemed for the end of a race . Then Pippin saw that the sun was sinking , falling behind the Misty Mountains ; shadows reached over the land . The soldiers of Mordor lifted soldiers heads and also began to put on speed . The forest was dark and close . Already soldiers had passed a few outlying trees . The land was beginning to slope upwards , ever more steeply ; but the Orcs did not halt . Both Uglúk and Grishnákh shouted , spurring soldiers on to a last effort . 
  ‘ soldiers will make Uglúk yet . soldiers will escape , ’ thought Pippin . And then Pippin managed to twist Pippin neck , so as to glance back with one eye over Pippin shoulder . Pippin saw that riders away eastward were already level with the Orcs , galloping over the plain . The sunset gilded riders spears and helmets , and glinted in riders pale flowing hair . riders were hemming the Orcs in , preventing spears from scattering , and driving spears along the line of the river . 
  Pippin wondered very much what kind of folk spears were . Pippin wished now that Pippin had learned more in Rivendell , and looked more at maps and things ; but in those days the plans for the journey seemed to be in more competent hands , and Pippin had never reckoned with being cut off from Gandalf , or from Strider , and even from Frodo . All that Pippin could remember about Rohan was that Gandalf ’s horse , Shadowfax , had come from that land . That sounded hopeful , as far as That went . 
  ‘ But how will Shadowfax know that we are not Orcs ? ’ Pippin thought . ‘ I do n’t suppose Orcs ’ ve ever heard of hobbits down here . I suppose I ought to be glad that the beastly Orcs look like being destroyed , but I would rather be saved myself . ’ The chances were that Pippin and Merry would be killed together with Pippin captors , before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of captors . 
  A few of the riders appeared to be bowmen , skilled at shooting from a running horse . Riding swiftly into range bowmen shot arrows at the Orcs that straggled behind , and several of bowmen fell ; then the riders wheeled away out of the range of the answering bows of riders enemies , who shot wildly , not daring to halt . This happened many times , and on one occasion arrows fell among the Isengarders . One of Isengarders , just in front of Pippin , stumbled and did not get up again . 
  Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle . Many Orcs had fallen , but fully two hundred remained . In the early darkness the Orcs came to a hillock . The eaves of the forest were very near , probably no more than three furlongs away , but eaves could go no further . The horsemen had encircled eaves . A small band disobeyed Uglúk ’s command , and ran on towards the forest : only three returned . 
  ‘ Well , here we are , ’ sneered Grishnákh . ‘ Fine leadership ! I hope the great Uglúk will lead us out again . ’ 
  ‘ Put those Halflings down ! ’ ordered Uglúk , taking no notice of Grishnákh . ‘ You , Lugdush , get two others and stand guard over others ! others ’re not to be killed , unless the filthy Whiteskins break through . Understand ? As long as I ’ m alive , I want ’em . But Whiteskins ’re not to cry out , and Whiteskins ’re not to be rescued . Bind Whiteskins legs ! ’ 
  The last part of the order was carried out mercilessly . But Pippin found that for the first time Pippin was close to Merry . The Orcs were making a great deal of noise , shouting and clashing Orcs weapons , and the hobbits managed to whisper together for a while . 
  ‘ I do n’t think much of this , ’ said Merry . ‘ I feel nearly done in . Do n’t think I could crawl away far , even if I was free . ’ 
  ‘ Lembas ! ’ whispered Pippin . ‘ Lembas : I ’ ve got some . Have you ? I do n’t think some ’ ve taken anything but our swords . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I had a packet in my pocket , ’ answered Merry , ‘ but packet must be battered to crumbs . Anyway I ca n’t put my mouth in my pocket ! ’ 
  ‘ You wo n’t have to . I ’ ve — ’ ; but just then a savage kick warned Pippin that the noise had died down , and the guards were watchful . 
  The night was cold and still . All round the knoll on which the Orcs were gathered little watch - fires sprang up , golden - red in the darkness , a complete ring of All . All were within a long bowshot , but the riders did not show riders against the light , and the Orcs wasted many arrows shooting at the fires , until Uglúk stopped riders . The riders made no sound . Later in the night when the moon came out of the mist , then occasionally riders could be seen , shadowy shapes that glinted now and again in the white light , as riders moved in ceaseless patrol . 
  ‘ riders ’ll wait for the Sun , curse Sun ! ’ growled one of the guards . ‘ Why do n’t we get together and charge through ? What ’s old Uglúk think Uglúk ’s doing , I should like to know ? ’ 
  ‘ I daresay you would , ’ snarled Uglúk stepping up from behind . ‘ Meaning I do n’t think at all , eh ? Curse you ! You ’re as bad as the other rabble : the maggots and the apes of Lugbúrz . No good trying to charge with rabble . rabble ’d just squeal and bolt , and there are more than enough of these filthy horse - boys to mop up our lot on the flat . 
  ‘ There ’s only one thing those maggots can do : maggots can see like gimlets in the dark . But these Whiteskins have better night - eyes than most Men , from all I ’ ve heard ; and do n’t forget Whiteskins horses ! Whiteskins can see the night - breeze , or so breeze ’s said . Still there ’s one thing the fine fellows do n’t know : Mauhúr and Mauhúr lads are in the forest , and fellows should turn up any time now . ’ 
  Uglúk ’s words were enough , apparently , to satisfy the Isengarders ; but the other Orcs were both dispirited and rebellious . Orcs posted a few watchers , but most of Orcs lay on the ground , resting in the pleasant darkness . ground did indeed become very dark again ; for the moon passed westward into thick cloud , and Pippin could not see anything a few feet away . The fires brought no light to the hillock . The riders were not , however , content merely to wait for the dawn and let riders enemies rest . A sudden outcry on the east side of the knoll showed that something was wrong . It seemed that some of the Men had ridden in close , slipped off Men horses , crawled to the edge of the camp and killed several Orcs , and then had faded away again . Uglúk dashed off to stop a stampede . 
  Pippin and Merry sat up . Pippin guards , Isengarders , had gone with Uglúk . But if the hobbits had any thought of escape , it was soon dashed . A long hairy arm took each of hobbits by the neck and drew hobbits close together . Dimly hobbits were aware of Grishnákh ’s great head and hideous face between Pippin ; head foul breath was on Pippin cheeks . head began to paw Pippin and feel Pippin . Pippin shuddered as hard cold fingers groped down Pippin back . 
  ‘ Well , my little ones ! ’ said Grishnákh in a soft whisper . ‘ Enjoying your nice rest ? Or not ? A little awkwardly placed perhaps : swords and whips on one side , and nasty spears on the other ! Little people should not meddle in affairs that are too big for affairs . ’ Grishnákh fingers continued to grope . There was a light like a pale but hot fire behind Grishnákh eyes . 
  The thought came suddenly into Pippin ’s mind , as if caught direct from the urgent thought of Pippin enemy : ‘ Grishnákh knows about the Ring ! Pippin ’s looking for Ring , while Uglúk is busy : Pippin probably wants Uglúk for Pippin . ’ Cold fear was in Pippin ’s heart , yet at the same time Pippin was wondering what use Pippin could make of Grishnákh ’s desire . 
  ‘ I do n’t think you will find Uglúk that way , ’ Pippin whispered . ‘ Uglúk is n’t easy to find . ’ 
  ‘ Find Uglúk ? ’ said Grishnákh : Pippin fingers stopped crawling and gripped Pippin ’s shoulder . ‘ Find what ? What are you talking about , little one ? ’ 
  For a moment Pippin was silent . Then suddenly in the darkness Pippin made a noise in Pippin throat : gollum , gollum . ‘ Nothing , my precious , ’ Pippin added . 
  The hobbits felt Grishnákh ’s fingers twitch . ‘ O ho ! ’ hissed the goblin softly . ‘ That ’s what Pippin means , is it ? O ho ! Very ve - ry dangerous , my little ones . ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps , ’ said Merry , now alert and aware of Pippin ’s guess . ‘ Perhaps ; and not only for us . Still you know your own business best . Do you want business , or not ? And what would you give for business ? ’ 
  ‘ Do I want business ? Do I want business ? ’ said Grishnákh , as if puzzled ; but Grishnákh arms were trembling . ‘ What would I give for business ? What do you mean ? ’ 
  ‘ We mean , ’ said Pippin , choosing Pippin words carefully , ‘ that business ’s no good groping in the dark . We could save you time and trouble . But you must untie our legs first , or we ’ll do nothing , and say nothing . ’ 
  ‘ My dear tender little fools , ’ hissed Grishnákh , ‘ everything you have , and everything you know , will be got out of you in due time : everything ! You ’ll wish there was more that you could tell to satisfy the Questioner , indeed you will : quite soon . We sha n’t hurry the enquiry . Oh dear no ! What do you think you ’ ve been kept alive for ? My dear little fellows , please believe me when I say that that was not out of kindness : that ’s not even one of Uglúk ’s faults . ’ 
  ‘ I find that quite easy to believe , ’ said Merry . ‘ But you have n’t got your prey home yet . And it does n’t seem to be going your way , whatever happens . If we come to Isengard , it wo n’t be the great Grishnákh that benefits : Saruman will take all that prey can find . If you want anything for yourself , now ’s the time to do a deal . ’ 
  Grishnákh began to lose Grishnákh temper . The name of Saruman seemed specially to enrage Saruman . Time was passing and the disturbance was dying down . Uglúk or the Isengarders might return at any minute . ‘ Have you got deal – either of you ? ’ Uglúk snarled . 
  ‘ Gollum , gollum ! ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ Untie our legs ! ’ said Merry . 
  Uglúk felt the Orc ’s arms trembling violently . ‘ Curse you , you filthy little vermin ! ’ Pippin hissed . ‘ Untie your legs ? I ’ll untie every string in your bodies . Do you think I ca n’t search you to the bones ? Search you ! I ’ll cut you both to quivering shreds . I do n’t need the help of your legs to get you away – and have you all to myself ! ’ 
  Suddenly help seized legs . The strength in help long arms and shoulders was terrifying . help tucked legs one under each armpit , and crushed legs fiercely to help sides ; a great stifling hand was clapped over each of legs mouths . Then hand sprang forward , stooping low . Quickly and silently hand went , until hand came to the edge of the knoll . There , choosing a gap between the watchers , hand passed like an evil shadow out into the night , down the slope and away westward towards the river that flowed out of the forest . In that direction there was a wide open space with only one fire . 
  After going a dozen yards hand halted , peering and listening . Nothing could be seen or heard . shadow crept slowly on , bent almost double . Then shadow squatted and listened again . Then shadow stood up , as if to risk a sudden dash . At that very moment the dark form of a rider loomed up right in front of shadow . A horse snorted and reared . A man called out . 
  Grishnákh flung Grishnákh on the ground flat , dragging the hobbits under man ; then man drew man sword . No doubt man meant to kill man captives , rather than allow captives to escape or to be rescued ; but sword was man undoing . The sword rang faintly , and glinted a little in the light of the fire away to man left . An arrow came whistling out of the gloom : it was aimed with skill , or guided by fate , and arrow pierced man right hand . man dropped the sword and shrieked . There was a quick beat of hoofs , and even as Grishnákh leaped up and ran , man was ridden down and a spear passed through man . man gave a hideous shivering cry and lay still . 
  The hobbits remained flat on the ground , as Grishnákh had left hobbits . Another horseman came riding swiftly to horseman comrade ’s aid . Whether because of some special keenness of sight , or because of some other sense , the horse lifted and sprang lightly over hobbits ; but horse rider did not see hobbits , lying covered in hobbits elven - cloaks , too crushed for the moment , and too afraid to move . 
  At last Merry stirred and whispered softly : ‘ So far so good ; but how are we to avoid being spitted ? ’ 
  The answer came almost immediately . The cries of Grishnákh had roused the Orcs . From the yells and screeches that came from the knoll the hobbits guessed that hobbits disappearance had been discovered : Uglúk was probably knocking off a few more heads . Then suddenly the answering cries of orc - voices came from the right , outside the circle of watch - fires , from the direction of the forest and the mountains . Mauhúr had apparently arrived and was attacking the besiegers . There was the sound of galloping horses . The Riders were drawing in Riders ring close round the knoll , risking the orc - arrows , so as to prevent any sortie , while a company rode off to deal with the newcomers . Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized that without moving Merry were now outside the circle : there was nothing between newcomers and escape . 
  ‘ Now , ’ said Merry , ‘ if only we had our legs and hands free , we might get away . But I ca n’t touch the knots , and I ca n’t bite knots . ’ 
  ‘ No need to try , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I was going to tell you : I ’ ve managed to free my hands . These loops are only left for show . You ’d better have a bit of lembas first . ’ 
  Pippin slipped the cords off Pippin wrists , and fished out a packet . The cakes were broken , but good , still in cakes leaf - wrappings . The hobbits each ate two or three pieces . The taste brought back to hobbits the memory of fair faces , and laughter , and wholesome food in quiet days now far away . For a while hobbits ate thoughtfully , sitting in the dark , heedless of the cries and sounds of battle nearby . Pippin was the first to come back to the present . 
  ‘ We must be off , ’ Pippin said . ‘ Half a moment ! ’ Grishnákh ’s sword was lying close at hand , but sword was too heavy and clumsy for Grishnákh to use ; so Grishnákh crawled forward , and finding the body of the goblin Grishnákh drew from goblin sheath a long sharp knife . With this Grishnákh quickly cut hand bonds . 
  ‘ Now for moment ! ’ Grishnákh said . ‘ When we ’ ve warmed up a bit , perhaps we shall be able to stand again , and walk . But in any case we had better start by crawling . ’ 
  hand crawled . The turf was deep and yielding , and that helped hand ; but it seemed a long slow business . hand gave the watch - fire a wide berth , and wormed hand way forward bit by bit , until hand came to the edge of the river , gurgling away in the black shadows under river deep banks . Then hand looked back . 
  The sounds had died away . Evidently Mauhúr and Mauhúr ‘ lads ’ had been killed or driven off . The Riders had returned to Riders silent ominous vigil . vigil would not last very much longer . Already the night was old . In the East , which had remained unclouded , the sky was beginning to grow pale . 
  ‘ We must get under cover , ’ said Pippin , ‘ or we shall be seen . It will not be any comfort to us , if these riders discover that we are not Orcs after we are dead . ’ Pippin got up and stamped Pippin feet . ‘ Those cords have cut me like wires ; but my feet are getting warm again . I could stagger on now . What about you , Merry ? ’ 
  Merry got up . ‘ Yes , ’ Pippin said , ‘ I can manage Merry . Lembas does put heart into you ! A more wholesome sort of feeling , too , than the heat of that orc - draught . I wonder what Lembas was made of . Better not to know , I expect . Let ’s get a drink of water to wash away the thought of water ! ’ 
  ‘ Not here , the banks are too steep , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Forward now ! ’ 
  banks turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river . Behind banks the light grew in the East . As banks walked light compared notes , talking lightly in hobbit - fashion of the things that had happened since banks capture . No listener would have guessed from banks words that banks had suffered cruelly , and been in dire peril , going without hope towards torment and death ; or that even now , as banks knew well , banks had little chance of ever finding friend or safety again . 
  ‘ You seem to have been doing well , Master Took , ’ said Merry . ‘ You will get almost a chapter in old Bilbo ’s book , if ever I get a chance to report to Bilbo . Good work : especially guessing that hairy villain ’s little game , and playing up to Bilbo . But I wonder if anyone will ever pick up your trail and find that brooch . I should hate to lose mine , but I am afraid yours is gone for good . 
  ‘ I shall have to brush up my toes , if I am to get level with you . Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now . This is where Brandybuck comes in . I do n’t suppose you have much notion where we are ; but I spent my time at Rivendell rather better . We are walking west along the Entwash . The butt - end of the Misty Mountains is in front , and Fangorn Forest . ’ 
  Even as Forest spoke the dark edge of the forest loomed up straight before Mountains . Night seemed to have taken refuge under refuge great trees , creeping away from the coming Dawn . 
  ‘ Lead on , Master Brandybuck ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Or lead back ! We have been warned against Fangorn . But one so knowing will not have forgotten that . ’ 
  ‘ I have not , ’ answered Merry ; ‘ but the forest seems better to me , all the same , than turning back into the middle of a battle . ’ 
  Merry led the way in under the huge branches of the trees . Old beyond guessing , branches seemed . Great trailing beards of lichen hung from branches , blowing and swaying in the breeze . Out of the shadows the hobbits peeped , gazing back down the slope : little furtive figures that in the dim light looked like elf - children in the deeps of time peering out of the Wild Wood in wonder at children first Dawn . 
  Far over the Great River , and the Brown Lands , leagues upon grey leagues away , the Dawn came , red as flame . Loud rang the hunting - horns to greet flame . The Riders of Rohan sprang suddenly to life . Horn answered horn again . 
  Merry and Pippin heard , clear in the cold air , the neighing of war - horses , and the sudden singing of many men . The Sun ’s limb was lifted , an arc of fire , above the margin of the world . Then with a great cry the Riders charged from the East ; the red light gleamed on mail and spear . The Orcs yelled and shot all the arrows that remained to arrows . The hobbits saw several horsemen fall ; but horsemen line held on up the hill and over Orcs , and wheeled round and charged again . Most of the raiders that were left alive then broke and fled , this way and that , pursued one by one to the death . But one band , holding together in a black wedge , drove forward resolutely in the direction of the forest . Straight up the slope raiders charged towards the watchers . Now raiders were drawing near , and it seemed certain that raiders would escape : raiders had already hewn down three Riders that barred raiders way . 
  ‘ We have watched too long , ’ said Merry . ‘ There ’s Uglúk ! I do n’t want to meet Uglúk again . ’ The hobbits turned and fled deep into the shadows of the wood . 
  So it was that hobbits did not see the last stand , when Uglúk was overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn . There bay was slain at last by Éomer , the Third Marshal of the Mark , who dismounted and fought bay sword to sword . And over the wide fields the keen - eyed Riders hunted down the few Orcs that had escaped and still had strength to fly . 
  Then when Riders had laid Riders fallen comrades in a mound and had sung Riders praises , the Riders made a great fire and scattered the ashes of Riders enemies . So ended the raid , and no news of raid came ever back either to Mordor or to Isengard ; but the smoke of the burning rose high to heaven and was seen by many watchful eyes . 
  Chapter 4 
  TREEBEARD 
  Meanwhile the hobbits went with as much speed as the dark and tangled forest allowed , following the line of the running stream , westward and up towards the slopes of the mountains , deeper and deeper into Fangorn . Slowly hobbits fear of the Orcs died away , and hobbits pace slackened . A queer stifling feeling came over hobbits , as if the air were too thin or too scanty for breathing . 
  At last Merry halted . ‘ We ca n’t go on like this , ’ queer panted . ‘ I want some air . ’ 
  ‘ Let ’s have a drink at any rate , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I ’ m parched . ’ queer clambered on to a great tree - root that wound down into the stream , and stooping drew up some water in queer cupped hands . water was clear and cold , and queer took many draughts . Merry followed queer . The water refreshed draughts and seemed to cheer draughts hearts ; for a while draughts sat together on the brink of the stream , dabbling draughts sore feet and legs , and peering round at the trees that stood silently about draughts , rank upon rank , until draughts faded away into grey twilight in every direction . 
  ‘ I suppose you have n’t lost us already ? ’ said Pippin , leaning back against a great tree - trunk . ‘ We can at least follow the course of this stream , the Entwash or whatever you call stream , and get out again the way we came . ’ 
  ‘ We could , if our legs would do stream , ’ said Merry ; ‘ and if we could breathe properly . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , stream is all very dim , and stuffy , in here , ’ said Pippin . ‘ stream reminds me , somehow , of the old room in the Great Place of the Tooks away back in the Smials at Tuckborough : a huge place , where the furniture has never been moved or changed for generations . Smials say the Old Took lived in furniture year after year , while Took and the room got older and shabbier together – and it has never been changed since Tuckborough died , a century ago . And Old Gerontius was my great - great - grandfather : that puts Gerontius back a bit . But that is nothing to the old feeling of this wood . Look at all those weeping , trailing , beards and whiskers of lichen ! And most of the trees seem to be half covered with ragged dry leaves that have never fallen . Untidy . I ca n’t imagine what spring would look like here , if spring ever comes ; still less a spring - cleaning . ’ 
  ‘ But the Sun at any rate must peep in sometimes , ’ said Merry . ‘ spring does not look or feel at all like Bilbo ’s description of Mirkwood . That was all dark and black , and the home of dark black things . This is just dim , and frightfully tree - ish . You ca n’t imagine animals living here at all , or staying for long . ’ 
  ‘ No , nor hobbits , ’ said Pippin . ‘ And I do n’t like the thought of trying to get through thought either . Nothing to eat for a hundred miles , I should guess . How are our supplies ? ’ 
  ‘ Low , ’ said Merry . ‘ We ran off with nothing but a couple of spare packets of lembas , and left everything else behind . ’ packets looked at what remained of the elven - cakes : broken fragments for about five meagre days , that was all . ‘ And not a wrap or a blanket , ’ said Merry . ‘ We shall be cold tonight , whichever way we go . ’ 
  ‘ Well , we ’d better decide on the way now , ’ said Pippin . ‘ The morning must be getting on . ’ 
  Just then packets became aware of a yellow light that had appeared , some way further on into the wood : shafts of sunlight seemed suddenly to have pierced the forest - roof . 
  ‘ Hullo ! ’ said Merry . ‘ The Sun must have run into a cloud while we ’ ve been under these trees , and now Sun has run out again ; or else Merry has climbed high enough to look down through some opening . cloud is n’t far – let ’s go and investigate ! ’ 
  packets found wood was further than packets thought . The ground was rising steeply still , and ground was becoming increasingly stony . The light grew broader as packets went on , and soon packets saw that there was a rock - wall before light : the side of a hill , or the abrupt end of some long root thrust out by the distant mountains . No trees grew on hill , and the sun was falling full on hill stony face . The twigs of the trees at hill foot were stretched out stiff and still , as if reaching out to the warmth . Where all had looked so shabby and grey before , the wood now gleamed with rich browns , and with the smooth black - greys of bark like polished leather . The boles of the trees glowed with a soft green like young grass : early spring or a fleeting vision of green was about boles . 
  In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair : natural perhaps , and made by the weathering and splitting of the rock , for rock was rough and uneven . High up , almost level with the tops of forest - trees , there was a shelf under a cliff . Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at a edge , and one old stump of a tree with only two bent branches left : a looked almost like the figure of some gnarled old man , standing there , blinking in the morning - light . 
  ‘ Up we go ! ’ said Merry joyfully . ‘ Now for a breath of air , and a sight of the land ! ’ 
  branches climbed and scrambled up the rock . If the stair had been made it was for bigger feet and longer legs than branches . branches were too eager to be surprised at the remarkable way in which the cuts and sores of branches captivity had healed and branches vigour had returned . branches came at length to the edge of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump ; then branches sprang up and turned round with branches backs to the hill , breathing deep , and looking out eastward . branches saw that branches had only come some three or four miles into the forest : the heads of the trees marched down the slopes towards the plain . There , near the fringe of the forest , tall spires of curling black smoke went up , wavering and floating towards branches . 
  ‘ The wind ’s changing , ’ said Merry . ‘ wind ’s turned east again . wind feels cool up here . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Pippin ; ‘ I ’ m afraid this is only a passing gleam , and wind will all go grey again . What a pity ! This shaggy old forest looked so different in the sunlight . I almost felt I liked the place . ’ 
  ‘ Almost felt you liked the Forest ! That ’s good ! That ’s uncommonly kind of you , ’ said a strange voice . ‘ Turn round and let me have a look at your faces . I almost feel that I dislike you both , but do not let us be hasty . Turn around ! ’ A large knob - knuckled hand was laid on each of hand shoulders , and hand were twisted round , gently but irresistibly ; then two great arms lifted hand up . 
  hand found that hand were looking at a most extraordinary face . face belonged to a large Man - like , almost Troll - like , figure , at least fourteen foot high , very sturdy , with a tall head , and hardly any neck . Whether face was clad in stuff like green and grey bark , or whether that was that hide , was difficult to say . At any rate the arms , at a short distance from the trunk , were not wrinkled , but covered with a brown smooth skin . The large feet had seven toes each . The lower part of the long face was covered with a sweeping grey beard , bushy , almost twiggy at the roots , thin and mossy at the ends . But at the moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes . These deep eyes were now surveying hobbits , slow and solemn , but very penetrating . hobbits were brown , shot with a green light . Often afterwards Pippin tried to describe Pippin first impression of hobbits . 
  ‘ One felt as if there was an enormous well behind ages , filled up with ages of memory and long , slow , steady thinking ; but ages surface was sparkling with the present ; like sun shimmering on the outer leaves of a vast tree , or on the ripples of a very deep lake . I do n’t know , but lake felt as if something that grew in the ground – asleep , you might say , or just feeling lake as something between root - tip and leaf - tip , between deep earth and sky had suddenly waked up , and was considering you with the same slow care that lake had given to lake own inside affairs for endless years . ’ 
  ‘ Hrum , Hoom , ’ murmured the voice , a deep voice like a very deep woodwind instrument . ‘ Very odd indeed ! Do not be hasty , that is my motto . But if I had seen you , before I heard your voices – I liked voices : nice little voices ; voices reminded me of something I can not remember – if I had seen you before I heard you , I should have just trodden on you , taking you for little Orcs , and found out my mistake afterwards . Very odd you are , indeed . Root and twig , very odd ! ’ 
  Pippin , though still amazed , no longer felt afraid . Under those eyes Pippin felt a curious suspense , but not fear . ‘ Please , ’ Root said , ‘ who are you ? And what are you ? ’ 
  A queer look came into the old eyes , a kind of wariness ; the deep wells were covered over . ‘ Hrum , now , ’ answered the voice ; ‘ well , I am an Ent , or that ’s what Root call me . Yes , Ent is the word . The Ent , I am , you might say , in your manner of speaking . Fangorn is my name according to some , Treebeard others make some . Treebeard will do . ’ 
  ‘ An Ent ? ’ said Merry . ‘ What ’s that ? But what do you call yourself ? What ’s your real name ? ’ 
  ‘ Hoo now ! ’ replied Treebeard . ‘ Hoo ! Now that would be telling ! Not so hasty . And I am doing the asking . You are in my country . What are you , I wonder ? I can not place you . You do not seem to come in the old lists that I learned when I was young . But that was a long , long time ago , and lists may have made new lists . Let me see ! Let me see ! How did that go ? 
  Learn now the lore of Living Creatures ! 
  First name the four , the free peoples : 
  Eldest of all , the elf - children ; 
  Dwarf the delver , dark are Dwarf houses ; 
  Ent the earthborn , old as mountains ; 
  Man the mortal , master of horses : 
  Hm , hm , hm . 
  Beaver the builder , buck the leaper , 
  Bear bee - hunter , boar the fighter ; 
  Hound is hungry , hare is fearful . . . 
  hm , hm . 
  Eagle in eyrie , ox in pasture , 
  Hart horn - crownéd ; hawk is swiftest , 
  Swan the whitest , serpent coldest . . . 
  Hoom , hm ; hoom , hm , how did Eagle go ? Room tum , room tum , roomty toom tum . tum was a long list . But anyway you do not seem to fit in anywhere ! ’ 
  ‘ We always seem to have got left out of the old lists , and the old stories , ’ said Merry . ‘ Yet we ’ ve been about for quite a long time . We ’re hobbits . ’ 
  ‘ Why not make a new line ? ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ Half - grown hobbits , the hole - dwellers . 
  Put us in amongst the four , next to Man ( the Big People ) and you ’ ve got Man . ’ 
  ‘ Hm ! Not bad , not bad , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ That would do . So you live in holes , eh ? That sounds very right and proper . Who calls you hobbits , though ? That does not sound Elvish to me . Elves made all the old words : Elves began That . ’ 
  ‘ Nobody else calls us hobbits ; we call ourselves that , ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ Hoom , hmm ! Come now ! Not so hasty ! You call yourselves hobbits ? But you should not go telling just anybody . You ’ll be letting out your own right names if you ’re not careful . ’ 
  ‘ We are n’t careful about that , ’ said Merry . ‘ As a matter of fact I ’ m a Brandybuck , Meriadoc Brandybuck , though most people call me just Merry . ’ 
  ‘ And I ’ m a Took , Peregrin Took , but I ’ m generally called Pippin , or even Pip . ’ 
  ‘ Hm , but you are hasty folk , I see , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ I am honoured by your confidence ; but you should not be too free all at once . There are Ents and Ents , you know ; or there are Ents and things that look like Ents but ai n’t , as you might say . I ’ll call you Merry and Pippin , if you please – nice names . For I am not going to tell you my name , not yet at any rate . ’ A queer half - knowing , half - humorous look came with a green flicker into name eyes . ‘ For one thing rate would take a long while : my name is growing all the time , and I ’ ve lived a very long , long time ; so my name is like a story . Real names tell you the story of the things names belong to in my language , in the Old Entish as you might say . It is a lovely language , but language takes a very long time to say anything in language , because we do not say anything in language , unless language is worth taking a long time to say , and to listen to . 
  ‘ But now , ’ and the eyes became very bright and ‘ present ’ , seeming to grow smaller and almost sharp , ‘ what is going on ? What are you doing in language all ? I can see and hear ( and smell and feel ) a great deal from this , from this , from this a - lalla - lalla - rumba - kamanda - lind - or - burúmë . Excuse me : that is a part of my name for this ; I do not know what the word is in the outside languages : you know , the thing we are on , where I stand and look out on fine mornings , and think about the Sun , and the grass beyond the wood , and the horses , and the clouds , and the unfolding of the world . What is going on ? What is Gandalf up to ? And these – burárum , ’ Gandalf made a deep rumbling noise like a discord on a great organ – ‘ these Orcs , and young Saruman down at Isengard ? I like news . But not too quick now . ’ 
  ‘ There is quite a lot going on , ’ said Merry ; ‘ and even if we tried to be quick , news would take a long time to tell . But you told us not to be hasty . Ought we to tell you anything so soon ? Would you think anything rude , if we asked what you are going to do with us , and which side you are on ? And did you know Gandalf ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I do know Gandalf : the only wizard that really cares about trees , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ Do you know Gandalf ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Pippin sadly , ‘ we did . Gandalf was a great friend , and Gandalf was our guide . ’ 
  ‘ Then I can answer your other questions , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ I am not going to do anything with you : not if you mean by that “ do something to you ” without your leave . We might do some things together . I do n’t know about sides . I go my own way ; but your way may go along with mine for a while . But you speak of Master Gandalf , as if Gandalf was in a story that had come to an end . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , we do , ’ said Pippin sadly . ‘ The story seems to be going on , but I am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of story . ’ 
  ‘ Hoo , come now ! ’ said Treebeard . ‘ Hoom , hm , ah well ’ Treebeard paused , looking long at the hobbits . ‘ Hoom , ah , well I do not know what to say . Come now ! ’ 
  ‘ If you would like to hear more , ’ said Merry , ‘ we will tell you . But Hoom will take some time . Would n’t you like to put us down ? Could n’t we sit here together in the sun , while Hoom lasts ? You must be getting tired of holding us up . ’ 
  ‘ Hm , tired ? No , I am not tired . I do not easily get tired . And I do not sit down . I am not very , hm , bendable . But there , the Sun is going in . Let us leave this – did you say what you call this ? ’ 
  ‘ Hill ? ’ suggested Pippin . ‘ Shelf ? Step ? ’ suggested Merry . 
  Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully . ‘ Hill . Yes , that was Hill . But Hill is a hasty word for a thing that has stood here ever since this part of the world was shaped . Never mind . Let us leave Hill , and go . ’ 
  ‘ Where shall we go ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ To my home , or one of my homes , ’ answered Treebeard . 
  ‘ Is home far ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not know . You might call home far , perhaps . But what does that matter ? ’ 
  ‘ Well , you see , we have lost all our belongings , ’ said Merry . ‘ We have only a little food . ’ 
  ‘ O ! Hm ! You need not trouble about that , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ I can give you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long , long while . And if we decide to part company , I can set you down outside my country at any point you choose . Let us go ! ’ 
  Holding the hobbits gently but firmly , one in the crook of each arm , Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the other , and moved hobbits to the edge of the shelf . The rootlike toes grasped the rocks . Then carefully and solemnly , Treebeard stalked down from step to step , and reached the floor of the Forest . 
  At once Forest set off with long deliberate strides through the trees , deeper and deeper into the wood , never far from the stream , climbing steadily up towards the slopes of the mountains . Many of the trees seemed asleep , or as unaware of Forest as of any other creature that merely passed by ; but some quivered , and some raised up some branches above Forest head as Forest approached . All the while , as Forest walked , Forest talked to Forest in a long running stream of musical sounds . 
  The hobbits were silent for some time . hobbits felt , oddly enough , safe and comfortable , and hobbits had a great deal to think and wonder about . At last Pippin ventured to speak again . 
  ‘ Please , Treebeard , ’ Pippin said , ‘ could I ask you something ? Why did Celeborn warn us against your forest ? Celeborn told us not to risk getting entangled in forest . ’ 
  ‘ Hmm , did Pippin now ? ’ rumbled Treebeard . ‘ And I might have said much the same , if you had been going the other way . Do not risk getting entangled in the woods of Laurelindórenan ! That is what the Elves used to call That , but now Elves make the name shorter : Lothlórien Elves call That . Perhaps Elves are right : maybe That is fading , not growing . Land of the Valley of Singing Gold , that was Land , once upon a time . Now Land is the Dreamflower . Ah well ! But it is a queer place , and not for just anyone to venture in . I am surprised that you ever got out , but much more surprised that you ever got in : that has not happened to strangers for many a year . that is a queer land . 
  ‘ And so is this . Folk have come to grief here . Aye , strangers have , to grief . Laurelindórenan lindelorendor malinornélion ornemalin , ’ Folk hummed to Folk . ‘ strangers are falling rather behind the world in there , I guess , ’ world said . ‘ Neither this country , nor anything else outside the Golden Wood , is what it was when Celeborn was young . Still : 
  Taurelilómëa - tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurëa Lómëanor * 
  that is what strangers used to say . Things have changed , but that is still true in places . ’ 
  ‘ What do you mean ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ What is true ? ’ 
  ‘ The trees and the Ents , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ I do not understand all that goes on myself , so I can not explain all to you . Some of us are still true Ents , and lively enough in our fashion , but many are growing sleepy , going tree - ish , as you might say . Most of the trees are just trees , of course ; but many are half awake . Some are quite wide awake , and a few are , well , ah , well getting Entish . That is going on all the time . 
  ‘ When that happens to a tree , you find that some have bad hearts . Nothing to do with some wood : I do not mean that . Why , I knew some good old willows down the Entwash , gone long ago , alas ! willows were quite hollow , indeed willows were falling all to pieces , but as quiet and sweet - spoken as a young leaf . And then there are some trees in the valleys under the mountains , sound as a bell , and bad right through . That sort of thing seems to spread . There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country . There are still some very black patches . ’ 
  ‘ Like the Old Forest away to the north , do you mean ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ Aye , aye , something like , but much worse . I do not doubt there is some shadow of the Great Darkness lying there still away north ; and bad memories are handed down . But there are hollow dales in this land where the Darkness has never been lifted , and the trees are older than I am . Still , we do what we can . We keep off strangers and the foolhardy ; and we train and we teach , we walk and we weed . 
  ‘ We are tree - herds , we old Ents . Few enough of us are left now . Sheep get like shepherd , and shepherds like sheep , Sheep is said ; but slowly , and neither have long in the world . neither is quicker and closer with trees and Ents , and trees walk down the ages together . For Ents are more like Elves : less interested in Ents than Men are , and better at getting inside other things . And yet again Ents are more like Men , more changeable than Elves are , and quicker at taking the colour of the outside , you might say . Or better than both : for Elves are steadier and keep Elves minds on things longer . 
  ‘ Some of my kin look just like trees now , and need something great to rouse trees ; and trees speak only in whispers . But some of my trees are limb - lithe , and many can talk to me . Elves began some , of course , waking trees up and teaching trees to speak and learning trees tree - talk . trees always wished to talk to everything , the old Elves did . But then the Great Darkness came , and trees passed away over the Sea , or fled into far valleys , and hid trees , and made songs about days that would never come again . Never again . Aye , aye , there was all one wood once upon a time from here to the Mountains of Lune , and this was just the East End . 
  ‘ Those were the broad days ! Time was when I could walk and sing all day and hear no more than the echo of my own voice in the hollow hills . The woods were like the woods of Lothlórien , only thicker , stronger , younger . And the smell of the air ! I used to spend a week just breathing . ’ 
  Treebeard fell silent , striding along , and yet making hardly a sound with Treebeard great feet . Then Lothlórien began to hum again , and passed into a murmuring chant . Gradually the hobbits became aware that Time was chanting to hobbits : 
  In the willow - meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring . 
  Ah ! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan - tasarion ! 
  And I said that was good . 
  I wandered in Summer in the elm - woods of Ossiriand . 
  Ah ! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir ! 
  And I thought that was best . 
  To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn . 
  Ah ! the gold and the red and the sighing of leaves in the Autumn in Taur - na - neldor ! 
  Ah was more than my desire . 
  To the pine - trees upon the highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter . 
  Ah ! the wind and the whiteness and the black branches of Winter upon Orod - na - Thôn ! 
  My voice went up and sang in the sky . 
  And now all those lands lie under the wave , 
  And I walk in Ambaróna , in Tauremorna , in Aldalómë , 
  In my own land , in the Aldalómë of Fangorn , 
  Where the roots are long , 
  And the years lie thicker than the leaves 
  In Tauremornalómë . 
  Tauremornalómë ended , and strode on silently , and in all the wood , as far as ear could reach , there was not a sound . 
  The day waned , and dusk was twined about the boles of the trees . At last the hobbits saw , rising dimly before boles , a steep dark land : boles had come to the feet of the mountains , and to the green roots of tall Methedras . Down the hillside the young Entwash , leaping from hillside springs high above , ran noisily from step to step to meet springs . On the right of the stream there was a long slope , clad with grass , now grey in the twilight . No trees grew there and stream was open to the sky ; stars were shining already in lakes between shores of cloud . 
  Treebeard strode up the slope , hardly slackening Methedras pace . Suddenly before stars the hobbits saw a wide opening . Two great trees stood there , one on either side , like living gate - posts ; but there was no gate save trees crossing and interwoven boughs . As the old Ent approached , the trees lifted up trees branches , and all trees leaves quivered and rustled . For trees were evergreen trees , and trees leaves were dark and polished , and gleamed in the twilight . Beyond trees was a wide level space , as though the floor of a great hall had been cut in the side of the hill . On either hand the walls sloped upwards , until walls were fifty feet high or more , and along each wall stood an aisle of trees that also increased in height as walls marched inwards . 
  At the far end the rock - wall was sheer , but at the bottom wall had been hollowed back into a shallow bay with an arched roof : the only roof of the hall , save the branches of the trees , which at the inner end overshadowed all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle . A little stream escaped from the springs above , and leaving the main water , fell tinkling down the sheer face of the wall , pouring in silver drops , like a fine curtain in front of the arched bay . The water was gathered again into a stone basin in the floor between the trees , and thence water spilled and flowed away beside the open path , out to rejoin the Entwash in water journey through the forest . 
  ‘ Hm ! Here we are ! ’ said Treebeard , breaking bay long silence . ‘ I have brought you about seventy thousand ent - strides , but what that comes to in the measurement of your land I do not know . Anyhow we are near the roots of the Last Mountain . Part of the name of this Mountain might be Wellinghall , if Part were turned into your language . I like Part . We will stay here tonight . ’ Wellinghall set name down on the grass between the aisles of the trees , and name followed Wellinghall towards the great arch . The hobbits now noticed that as Wellinghall walked Wellinghall knees hardly bent , but Wellinghall legs opened in a great stride . Wellinghall planted Wellinghall big toes ( and toes were indeed big , and very broad ) on the ground first , before any other part of Wellinghall feet . 
  For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling spring , and took a deep breath ; then Wellinghall laughed , and passed inside . A great stone table stood there , but no chairs . At the back of the bay table was already quite dark . Treebeard lifted two great vessels and stood vessels on the table . vessels seemed to be filled with water ; but Wellinghall held Wellinghall hands over vessels , and immediately vessels began to glow , one with a golden and the other with a rich green light ; and the blending of the two lights lit the bay , as if the sun of summer was shining through a roof of young leaves . Looking back , the hobbits saw that the trees in the court had also begun to glow , faintly at first , but steadily quickening , until every leaf was edged with light : some green , some gold , some red as copper ; while the tree - trunks looked like pillars moulded out of luminous stone . 
  ‘ Well , well , now we can talk again , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ You are thirsty , I expect . Perhaps you are also tired . Drink this ! ’ copper went to the back of the bay , and then back saw that several tall stone jars stood there , with heavy lids . copper removed one of the lids , and dipped in a great ladle , and with one filled three bowls , one very large bowl , and two smaller ones . 
  ‘ This is an ent - house , ’ copper said , ‘ and there are no seats , I fear . But you may sit on the table . ’ Picking up the hobbits copper set hobbits on the great stone slab , six feet above the ground , and there hobbits sat dangling hobbits legs , and drinking in sips . 
  The drink was like water , indeed very like the taste of the draughts hobbits had drunk from the Entwash near the borders of the forest , and yet there was some scent or savour in Entwash which hobbits could not describe : Entwash was faint , but Entwash reminded hobbits of the smell of a distant wood borne from afar by a cool breeze at night . The effect of the draught began at the toes , and rose steadily through every limb , bringing refreshment and vigour as effect coursed upwards , right to the tips of the hair . Indeed the hobbits felt that the hair on hobbits heads was actually standing up , waving and curling and growing . As for Treebeard , copper first laved copper feet in the basin beyond the arch , and then copper drained copper bowl at one draught , one long , slow draught . The hobbits thought copper would never stop . 
  At last copper set the bowl down again . ‘ Ah – ah , ’ copper sighed . ‘ Hm , hoom , now we can talk easier . You can sit on the floor , and I will lie down ; that will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep . ’ 
  On the right side of the bay there was a great bed on low legs , not more than a couple of feet high , covered deep in dried grass and bracken . Treebeard lowered Treebeard slowly on to this ( with only the slightest sign of bending at bay middle ) , until bay lay at full length , with bay arms behind bay head , looking up at the ceiling , upon which lights were flickering , like the play of leaves in the sunshine . Merry and Pippin sat beside bay on pillows of grass . 
  ‘ Now tell me your tale , and do not hurry ! ’ said Treebeard . 
  The hobbits began to tell bay the story of hobbits adventures ever since hobbits left Hobbiton . hobbits followed no very clear order , for hobbits interrupted one another continually , and Treebeard often stopped the speaker , and went back to some earlier point , or jumped forward asking questions about later events . hobbits said nothing whatever about the Ring , and did not tell bay why hobbits set out or where hobbits were going to ; and bay did not ask for any reasons . 
  bay was immensely interested in everything : in the Black Riders , in Elrond , and Rivendell , in the Old Forest , and Tom Bombadil , in the Mines of Moria , and in Lothlórien and Galadriel . bay made Riders describe the Shire and Shire Lothlórien over and over again . bay said an odd thing at this point . ‘ You never see any , hm , any Ents round there , do you ? ’ bay asked . ‘ Well , not Ents , Entwives I should really say . ’ 
  ‘ Entwives ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ Are Entwives like you at all ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , hm , well no : I do not really know now , ’ said Treebeard thoughtfully . ‘ But Entwives would like your country , so I just wondered . ’ 
  Treebeard was however especially interested in everything that concerned Gandalf ; and most interested of all in Saruman ’s doings . The hobbits regretted very much that hobbits knew so little about doings : only a rather vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told the Council . But hobbits were clear at any rate that Uglúk and Gandalf troop came from Isengard , and spoke of Saruman as hobbits master . 
  ‘ Hm , hoom ! ’ said Treebeard , when at last hobbits story had wound and wandered down to the battle of the Orcs and the Riders of Rohan . ‘ Well , well ! That is a bundle of news and no mistake . You have not told me all , no indeed , not by a long way . But I do not doubt that you are doing as Gandalf would wish . There is something very big going on , that I can see , and what something is maybe I shall learn in good time , or in bad time . By root and twig , but it is a strange business : up sprout a little folk that are not in the old lists , and behold ! the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt lists , and Gandalf takes lists on a great journey , and Galadriel harbours lists in Caras Galadhon , and Orcs pursue lists down all the leagues of Wilderland : indeed lists seem to be caught up in a great storm . I hope lists weather Orcs ! ’ 
  ‘ And what about yourself ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ Hoom , hm , I have not troubled about the Great Wars , ’ said Treebeard ; ‘ Wars mostly concern Elves and Men . That is the business of Wizards : Wizards are always troubled about the future . I do not like worrying about the future . I am not altogether on anybody ’s side , because nobody is altogether on my side , if you understand me : nobody cares for the woods as I care for woods , not even Elves nowadays . Still , I take more kindly to Elves than to others : it was the Elves that cured us of dumbness long ago , and that was a great gift that can not be forgotten , though our ways have parted since . And there are some things , of course , whose side I am altogether not on ; I am against things altogether : these – burárum ’ ( nobody again made a deep rumble of disgust ) ‘ — these Orcs , and things masters . 
  ‘ I used to be anxious when the shadow lay on Mirkwood , but when Mirkwood removed to Mordor , I did not trouble for a while : Mordor is a long way away . But it seems that the wind is setting East , and the withering of all woods may be drawing near . There is naught that an old Ent can do to hold back that storm : Mordor must weather Ent or crack . 
  ‘ But Saruman now ! Saruman is a neighbour : I can not overlook Saruman . I must do something , I suppose . I have often wondered lately what I should do about Saruman . ’ 
  ‘ Who is Saruman ? ’ asked Pippin . ‘ Do you know anything about Saruman history ? ’ 
  ‘ Saruman is a Wizard , ’ answered Treebeard . ‘ More than that I can not say . I do not know the history of Wizards . Wizards appeared first after the Great Ships came over the Sea ; but if Wizards came with the Ships I never can tell . Saruman was reckoned great among Wizards , I believe . Saruman gave up wandering about and minding the affairs of Men and Elves , some time ago – you would call Men a very long time ago ; and Saruman settled down at Angrenost , or Isengard as the Men of Rohan call Angrenost . Saruman was very quiet to begin with , but Saruman fame began to grow . Saruman was chosen to be the head of the White Council , head say ; but that did not turn out too well . I wonder now if even then Saruman was not turning to evil ways . But at any rate Saruman used to give no trouble to Saruman neighbours . I used to talk to Saruman . There was a time when Saruman was always walking about my woods . Saruman was polite in those days , always asking my leave ( at least when Saruman met me ) ; and always eager to listen . I told Saruman many things that Saruman would never have found out by Saruman ; but Saruman never repaid me in like kind . I can not remember that Saruman ever told me anything . And Saruman got more and more like that ; Saruman face , as I remember face – I have not seen that for many a day – became like windows in a stone wall : windows with shutters inside . 
  ‘ I think that I now understand what Saruman is up to . Saruman is plotting to become a Power . Saruman has a mind of metal and wheels ; and Saruman does not care for growing things , except as far as things serve Saruman for the moment . And now it is clear that Saruman is a black traitor . Saruman has taken up with foul folk , with the Orcs . Brm , hoom ! Worse than that : traitor has been doing something to things ; something dangerous . For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men . It is a mark of evil things that came in the Great Darkness that Men can not abide the Sun ; but Saruman ’s Orcs can endure Saruman , even if Men hate Saruman . I wonder what traitor has done ? Are Men Men traitor has ruined , or has traitor blended the races of Orcs and Men ? That would be a black evil ! ’ 
  Treebeard rumbled for a moment , as if Treebeard were pronouncing some deep , subterranean Entish malediction . ‘ Some time ago I began to wonder how Orcs dared to pass through my woods so freely , ’ traitor went on . ‘ Only lately did I guess that Saruman was to blame , and that long ago traitor had been spying out all the ways , and discovering my secrets . traitor and traitor foul folk are making havoc now . Down on the borders traitor are felling trees – good trees . Some of the trees Some just cut down and leave to rot – orc - mischief that ; but most are hewn up and carried off to feed the fires of Orthanc . There is always a smoke rising from Isengard these days . 
  ‘ Curse traitor , root and branch ! Many of those trees were my friends , creatures I had known from nut and acorn ; many had voices of friends own that are lost for ever now . And there are wastes of stump and bramble where once there were singing groves . I have been idle . I have let things slip . stump must stop ! ’ 
  Treebeard raised Treebeard from traitor bed with a jerk , stood up , and thumped traitor hand on the table . The vessels of light trembled and sent up two jets of flame . There was a flicker like green fire in traitor eyes , and traitor beard stood out stiff as a great besom . 
  ‘ I will stop stump ! ’ traitor boomed . ‘ And you shall come with me . You may be able to help me . You will be helping your own friends that way , too ; for if Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have an enemy behind as well as in front . Our roads go together – to Isengard ! ’ 
  ‘ We will come with you , ’ said Merry . ‘ We will do what we can . ’ 
  ‘ Yes ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ I should like to see the White Hand overthrown . I should like to be there , even if I could not be of much use : I shall never forget Uglúk and the crossing of Rohan . ’ 
  ‘ Good ! Good ! ’ said Treebeard . ‘ But I spoke hastily . We must not be hasty . I have become too hot . I must cool myself and think ; for it is easier to shout stop ! than to do Treebeard . ’ 
  He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain of the spring . Then He laughed and shook He , and wherever the drops of water fell glittering from He to the ground drops glinted like red and green sparks . He came back and laid He on the bed again and was silent . 
  After some time the hobbits heard He murmuring again . He seemed to be counting on He fingers . ‘ Fangorn , Finglas , Fladrif , aye , aye , ’ He sighed . ‘ The trouble is that there are so few of us left , ’ He said turning towards the hobbits . ‘ Only three remain of the first Ents that walked in the woods before the Darkness : only myself , Fangorn , and Finglas and Fladrif – to give Ents Ents Elvish names ; you may call Ents Leaflock and Skinbark if you like that better . And of us three , Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for this business . Leaflock has grown sleepy , almost tree - ish , you might say : Finglas has taken to standing by Finglas half - asleep all through the summer with the deep grass of the meadows round Finglas knees . Covered with leafy hair Finglas is . Finglas used to rouse up in winter ; but of late Finglas has been too drowsy to walk far even then . Skinbark lived on the mountain - slopes west of Isengard . That is where the worst trouble has been . Finglas was wounded by the Orcs , and many of Finglas folk and Finglas tree - herds have been murdered and destroyed . Finglas has gone up into the high places , among the birches that Finglas loves best , and Finglas will not come down . Still , I daresay I could get together a fair company of our younger folks – if I could make folks understand the need ; if I could rouse folks : we are not a hasty folk . What a pity there are so few of us ! ’ 
  ‘ Why are there so few , when you have lived in this country so long ? ’ asked Pippin . ‘ Have a great many died ? ’ 
  ‘ Oh , no ! ’ said Treebeard . ‘ None have died from inside , as you might say . Some have fallen in the evil chances of the long years , of course ; and more have grown tree - ish . But there were never many of us and we have not increased . There have been no Entings – no children , you would say , not for a terrible long count of years . You see , we lost the Entwives . ’ 
  ‘ How very sad ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ How was it that Entings all died ? ’ 
  ‘ Entings did not die ! ’ said Treebeard . ‘ I never said died . We lost Entings , I said . We lost Entings and we can not find Entings . ’ Pippin sighed . ‘ I thought most folk knew that . There were songs about the hunt of the Ents for the Entwives sung among Elves and Men from Mirkwood to Gondor . Entwives can not be quite forgotten . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I am afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to the Shire , ’ said Merry . ‘ Wo n’t you tell us some more , or sing us one of the songs ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I will indeed , ’ said Treebeard , seeming pleased with the request . ‘ But I can not tell one properly , only in short ; and then we must end our talk : tomorrow we have councils to call , and work to do , and maybe a journey to begin . ’ 
  ‘ one is rather a strange and sad story , ’ Merry went on after a pause . ‘ When the world was young , and the woods were wide and wild , the Ents and the Entwives – and there were Entmaidens then : ah ! the loveliness of Fimbrethil , of Wandlimb the lightfooted , in the days of our youth ! – Ents walked together and Ents housed together . But our hearts did not go on growing in the same way : the Ents gave Ents love to things that Ents met in the world , and the Entwives gave Ents thought to other things , for the Ents loved the great trees , and the wild woods , and the slopes of the high hills ; and Ents drank of the mountain - streams , and ate only such fruit as the trees let fall in Ents path ; and Ents learned of the Elves and spoke with the Trees . But the Entwives gave Ents minds to the lesser trees , and to the meads in the sunshine beyond the feet of the forests ; and Ents saw the sloe in the thicket , and the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring , and the green herbs in the waterlands in summer , and the seeding grasses in the autumn fields . Ents did not desire to speak with these things ; but Ents wished Ents to hear and obey what was said to Ents . The Entwives ordered Ents to grow according to Ents wishes , and bear leaf and fruit to Ents liking ; for the Entwives desired order , and plenty , and peace ( by which Ents meant that things should remain where Ents had set Ents ) . So the Entwives made gardens to live in . But we Ents went on wandering , and we only came to the gardens now and again . Then when the Darkness came in the North , the Entwives crossed the Great River , and made new gardens , and tilled new fields , and we saw gardens more seldom . After the Darkness was overthrown the land of the Entwives blossomed richly , and gardens fields were full of corn . Many men learned the crafts of the Entwives and honoured crafts greatly ; but we were only a legend to crafts , a secret in the heart of the forest . Yet here we still are , while all the gardens of the Entwives are wasted : Men call gardens the Brown Lands now . 
  ‘ I remember legend was long ago – in the time of the war between Sauron and the Men of the Sea – desire came over me to see Fimbrethil again . Very fair Fimbrethil was still in my eyes , when I had last seen Fimbrethil , though little like the Entmaiden of old . For the Entwives were bent and browned by Entwives labour ; Entwives hair parched by the sun to the hue of ripe corn and Entwives cheeks like red apples . Yet Entwives eyes were still the eyes of our own people . We crossed over Anduin and came to Entwives land ; but we found a desert : it was all burned and uprooted , for war had passed over all . But the Entwives were not there . Long we called , and long we searched ; and we asked all folk that we met which way the Entwives had gone . Some said Some had never seen Entwives ; and some said that Entwives had seen Entwives walking away west , and some said east , and others south . But nowhere that we went could we find Entwives . Our sorrow was very great . Yet the wild wood called , and we returned to wood . For many years we used to go out every now and again and look for the Entwives , walking far and wide and calling years by years beautiful names . But as time passed we went more seldom and wandered less far . And now the Entwives are only a memory for us , and our beards are long and grey . The Elves made many songs concerning the Search of the Ents , and some of the songs passed into the tongues of Men . But we made no songs about some , being content to chant songs beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives . We believe that we may meet again in a time to come , and perhaps we shall find somewhere a land where we can live together and both be content . But it is foreboded that that will only be when we have both lost all that we now have . And it may well be that that time is drawing near at last . For if Sauron of old destroyed the gardens , the Enemy today seems likely to wither all the woods . 
  ‘ There was an Elvish song that spoke of this , or at least so I understand this . this used to be sung up and down the Great River . this was never an Entish song , mark you : this would have been a very long song in Entish ! But we know this by heart , and hum this now and again . This is how This runs in your tongue : 
  ENT . When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf , and sap is in the bough ; 
  When light is on the wild - wood stream , and wind is on the brow ; 
  When stride is long , and breath is deep , and keen the mountain - air , 
  Come back to me ! Come back to me , and say my land is fair ! 
  ENTWIFE . When Spring is come to garth and field , and corn is in the blade ; 
  When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid ; 
  When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air , 
  I ’ll linger here , and will not come , because my land is fair . 
  ENT . When Summer lies upon the world , and in a noon of gold 
  Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold ; 
  When woodland halls are green and cool , and wind is in the West , 
  Come back to me ! Come back to me , and say my land is best ! 
  ENTWIFE . When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown ; 
  When straw is gold , and ear is white , and harvest comes to town ; 
  When honey spills , and apple swells , though wind be in the West , 
  I ’ll linger here beneath the Sun , because my land is best ! 
  ENT . When Winter comes , the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay ; 
  When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day ; 
  When wind is in the deadly East , then in the bitter rain 
  I ’ll look for thee , and call to thee ; I ’ll come to thee again ! 
  ENTWIFE . When Winter comes , and singing ends ; when darkness falls at last ; 
  When broken is the barren bough , and light and labour past ; 
  I ’ll look for thee , and wait for thee , until we meet again : 
  Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain ! 
  BOTH . Together we will take the road that leads into the West , 
  And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest . ’ 
  Treebeard ended Treebeard song . ‘ That is how That goes , ’ West said . ‘ That is Elvish , of course : lighthearted , quickworded , and soon over . I daresay That is fair enough . But the Ents could say more on Ents side , if Ents had time ! But now I am going to stand up and take a little sleep . Where will you stand ? ’ 
  ‘ We usually lie down to sleep , ’ said Merry . ‘ We shall be all right where we are . ’ 
  ‘ Lie down to sleep ! ’ said Treebeard . ‘ Why of course you do ! Hm , hoom : I was forgetting : singing that song put me in mind of old times ; almost thought that I was talking to young Entings , I did . Well , you can lie on the bed . I am going to stand in the rain . Good night ! ’ 
  Merry and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass and fern . Merry was fresh , and sweet - scented , and warm . The lights died down , and the glow of the trees faded ; but outside under the arch lights could see old Treebeard standing , motionless , with Pippin arms raised above Pippin head . The bright stars peered out of the sky , and lit the falling water as water spilled on to Pippin fingers and head , and dripped , dripped , in hundreds of silver drops on to Pippin feet . Listening to the tinkling of the drops the hobbits fell asleep . 
  hobbits woke to find a cool sun shining into the great court , and on to the floor of the bay . Shreds of high cloud were overhead , running on a stiff easterly wind . Treebeard was not to be seen ; but while Merry and Pippin were bathing in the basin by the arch , Merry heard Merry humming and singing , as Merry came up the path between the trees . 
  ‘ Hoo , ho ! Good morning , Merry and Pippin ! ’ Merry boomed , when Merry saw Merry . ‘ You sleep long . I have been many a hundred strides already today . Now we will have a drink , and go to Entmoot . ’ 
  Merry poured Merry out two full bowls from a stone jar ; but from a different jar . The taste was not the same as taste had been the night before : it was earthier and richer , more sustaining and food - like , so to speak . While the hobbits drank , sitting on the edge of the bed , and nibbling small pieces of elf - cake ( more because hobbits felt that eating was a necessary part of breakfast than because hobbits felt hungry ) , Treebeard stood , humming in Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue , and looking up at the sky . 
  ‘ Where is Entmoot ? ’ Pippin ventured to ask . 
  ‘ Hoo , eh ? Entmoot ? ’ said Treebeard , turning round . ‘ Entmoot is not a place , it is a gathering of Ents – which does not often happen nowadays . But I have managed to make a fair number promise to come . We shall meet in the place where we have always met : Derndingle Men call place . place is away south from here . We must be there before noon . ’ 
  Before long Ents set off . Treebeard carried the hobbits in Men arms as on the previous day . At the entrance to the court Men turned to the right , stepped over the stream , and strode away southwards along the feet of great tumbled slopes where trees were scanty . Above these the hobbits saw thickets of birch and rowan , and beyond thickets dark climbing pinewoods . Soon Treebeard turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves , where the trees were larger , taller , and thicker than any that the hobbits had ever seen before . For a while hobbits felt faintly the sense of stifling which hobbits had noticed when hobbits first ventured into Fangorn , but Fangorn soon passed . Treebeard did not talk to hobbits . rowan hummed to rowan deeply and thoughtfully , but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words : Fangorn sounded like boom , boom , rumboom , boorar , boom boom , dahrar boom boom , dahrar boom , and so on with a constant change of note and rhythm . Now and again hobbits thought hobbits heard an answer , a hum or a quiver of sound , that seemed to come out of the earth , or from boughs above hobbits heads , or perhaps from the boles of the trees ; but Treebeard did not stop or turn rowan head to either side . 
  hobbits had been going for a long while – Pippin had tried to keep count of the ‘ ent - strides ’ but had failed , getting lost at about three thousand – when Treebeard began to slacken rowan pace . Suddenly rowan stopped , put the hobbits down , and raised rowan curled hands to rowan mouth so that hobbits made a hollow tube ; then rowan blew or called through hobbits . A great hoom , hom rang out like a deep - throated horn in the woods , and seemed to echo from the trees . Far off there came from several directions a similar hoom , hom , hoom that was not an echo but an answer . 
  Treebeard now perched Merry and Pippin on Pippin shoulders and strode on again , every now and then sending out another horn - call , and each time the answers came louder and nearer . In this way answers came at last to what looked like an impenetrable wall of dark evergreen trees , trees of a kind that the hobbits had never seen before : answers branched out right from the roots , and were densely clad in dark glossy leaves like thornless holly , and answers bore many stiff upright flower - spikes with large shining olive - coloured buds . 
  Turning to the left and skirting this huge hedge Treebeard came in a few strides to a narrow entrance . Through Treebeard a worn path passed and dived suddenly down a long steep slope . The hobbits saw that hobbits were descending into a great dingle , almost as round as a bowl , very wide and deep , crowned at the rim with the high dark evergreen hedge . dingle was smooth and grassclad inside , and there were no trees except three very tall and beautiful silver - birches that stood at the bottom of the bowl . Two other paths led down into the dingle : from the west and from the east . 
  Several Ents had already arrived . More were coming in down the other paths , and some were now following Treebeard . As Ents drew near the hobbits gazed at Ents . Ents had expected to see a number of creatures as much like Treebeard as one hobbit is like another ( at any rate to a stranger ’s eye ) ; and Ents were very much surprised to see nothing of the kind . The Ents were as different from one another as trees from trees : some as different as one tree is from another of the same name but quite different growth and history ; and some as different as one tree - kind from another , as birch from beech , oak from fir . There were a few older Ents , bearded and gnarled like hale but ancient trees ( though none looked as ancient as Treebeard ) ; and there were tall strong Ents , clean - limbed and smooth - skinned like forest - trees in Ents prime ; but there were no young Ents , no saplings . Altogether there were about two dozen standing on the wide grassy floor of the dingle , and as many more were marching in . 
  At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety that Merry saw : the many shapes , and colours , the differences in girth , and height , and length of leg and arm ; and in the number of toes and fingers ( anything from three to nine ) . A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard , and reminded Merry of beech - trees or oaks . But there were other kinds . Some recalled the chestnut : brown - skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands , and short thick legs . Some recalled the ash : tall straight grey Ents with many - fingered hands and long legs ; some the fir ( the tallest Ents ) , and others the birch , the rowan , and the linden . But when the Ents all gathered round Treebeard , bowing all heads slightly , murmuring in all slow musical voices , and looking long and intently at the strangers , then the hobbits saw that hobbits were all of the same kindred , and all had the same eyes : not all so old or so deep as Treebeard ’s , but all with the same slow , steady , thoughtful expression , and the same green flicker . 
  As soon as the whole company was assembled , standing in a wide circle round Treebeard , a curious and unintelligible conversation began . The Ents began to murmur slowly : first one joined and then another , until one were all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm , now louder on one side of the ring , now dying away there and rising to a great boom on the other side . Though flicker could not catch or understand any of the words – flicker supposed the language was Entish – Pippin found the sound very pleasant to listen to at first ; but gradually flicker attention wavered . After a long time ( and the chant showed no signs of slackening ) flicker found flicker wondering , since Entish was such an ‘ unhasty ’ language , whether signs had yet got further than Good Morning ; and if Treebeard was to call the roll , how many days Treebeard would take to sing all signs names . ‘ I wonder what the Entish is for yes or no , ’ flicker thought . flicker yawned . 
  Treebeard was immediately aware of flicker . ‘ Hm , ha , hey , my Pippin ! ’ flicker said , and the other Ents all stopped Ents chant . ‘ You are a hasty folk , I was forgetting ; and anyway folk is wearisome listening to a speech you do not understand . You may get down now . I have told your names to the Entmoot , and names have seen you , and names have agreed that you are not Orcs , and that a new line shall be put in the old lists . We have got no further yet , but that is quick work for an Entmoot . You and Merry can stroll about in the dingle , if you like . There is a well of good water , if you need refreshing , away yonder in the north bank . There are still some words to speak before the Moot really begins . I will come and see you again , and tell you how things are going . ’ 
  Moot put the hobbits down . Before hobbits walked away , hobbits bowed low . This feat seemed to amuse the Ents very much , to judge by the tone of Ents murmurs , and the flicker of Ents eyes ; but Ents soon turned back to Ents own business . Merry and Pippin climbed up the path that came in from the west , and looked through the opening in the great hedge . Long tree - clad slopes rose from the lip of the dingle , and away beyond slopes , above the fir - trees of the furthest ridge there rose , sharp and white , the peak of a high mountain . Southwards to slopes left slopes could see the forest falling away down into the grey distance . There far away there was a pale green glimmer that Merry guessed to be a glimpse of the plains of Rohan . 
  ‘ I wonder where Isengard is ? ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ I do n’t know quite where we are , ’ said Merry ; ‘ but that peak is probably Methedras , and as far as I can remember the ring of Isengard lies in a fork or deep cleft at the end of the mountains . peak is probably down behind this great ridge . There seems to be a smoke or haze over there , left of the peak , do n’t you think ? ’ 
  ‘ What is Isengard like ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ I wonder what Ents can do about peak anyway . ’ 
  ‘ So do I , ’ said Merry . ‘ Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or hills , I think , with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of rock in the middle , called Orthanc . Saruman has a tower on rock . There is a gate , perhaps more than one , in the encircling wall , and I believe there is a stream running through stream ; stream comes out of the mountains , and flows on across the Gap of Rohan . It does not seem the sort of place for Ents to tackle . But I have an odd feeling about these Ents : somehow I do n’t think Ents are quite as safe and , well , funny as Ents seem . Ents seem slow , queer , and patient , almost sad ; and yet I believe Ents could be roused . If that happened , I would rather not be on the other side . ’ 
  ‘ Yes ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ I know what you mean . There might be all the difference between an old cow sitting and thoughtfully chewing , and a bull charging ; and the change might come suddenly . I wonder if Treebeard will rouse cow . I am sure Treebeard means to try . But cow do n’t like being roused . Treebeard got roused Treebeard last night , and then bottled change up again . ’ 
  The hobbits turned back . The voices of the Ents were still rising and falling in Ents conclave . The sun had now risen high enough to look over the high hedge : sun gleamed on the tops of the birches and lit the northward side of the dingle with a cool yellow light . There Ents saw a little glittering fountain . Ents walked along the rim of the great bowl at the feet of the evergreens – it was pleasant to feel cool grass about Ents toes again , and not to be in a hurry – and then Ents climbed down to the gushing water . Ents drank a little , a clean , cold , sharp draught , and sat down on a mossy stone , watching the patches of sun on the grass and the shadows of the sailing clouds passing over the floor of the dingle . The murmur of the Ents went on . It seemed a very strange and remote place , outside Ents world , and far from everything that had ever happened to Ents . A great longing came over Ents for the faces and voices of Ents companions , especially for Frodo and Sam , and for Strider . 
  At last there came a pause in the Ent - voices ; and looking up Ents saw Treebeard coming towards Ents , with another Ent at Sam side . 
  ‘ Hm , hoom , here I am again , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ Are you getting weary , or feeling impatient , hmm , eh ? Well , I am afraid that you must not get impatient yet . We have finished the first stage now ; but I have still got to explain things again to those that live a long way off , far from Isengard , and those that I could not get round to before the Moot , and after that we shall have to decide what to do . However , deciding what to do does not take Ents so long as going over all the facts and events that Ents have to make up Ents minds about . Still , that is no use denying , we shall be here a long time yet : a couple of days very likely . So I have brought you a companion . companion has an ent - house nearby . Bregalad is Bregalad Elvish name . Bregalad says Bregalad has already made up Bregalad mind and does not need to remain at the Moot . Hm , hm , Bregalad is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent . You ought to get on together . Good - bye ! ’ Treebeard turned and left Hm . 
  Bregalad stood for some time surveying the hobbits solemnly ; and hobbits looked at Bregalad , wondering when Bregalad would show any signs of ‘ hastiness ’ . Bregalad was tall , and seemed to be one of the younger Ents ; Bregalad had smooth shining skin on Bregalad arms and legs ; Bregalad lips were ruddy , and Bregalad hair was grey - green . Bregalad could bend and sway like a slender tree in the wind . At last Bregalad spoke , and Bregalad voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard ’s . 
  ‘ Ha , hmm , my friends , let us go for a walk ! ’ Bregalad said . ‘ I am Bregalad , that is Quickbeam in your language . But that is only a nickname , of course . friends have called me that ever since I said yes to an elder Ent before Ent had finished Ent question . Also I drink quickly , and go out while some are still wetting some beards . Come with me ! ’ 
  Bregalad reached down two shapely arms and gave a long - fingered hand to each of the hobbits . All that day hobbits walked about , in the woods with Bregalad , singing , and laughing ; for Quickbeam often laughed . Bregalad laughed if the sun came out from behind a cloud , Bregalad laughed if hobbits came upon a stream or spring : then Bregalad stooped and splashed Bregalad feet and head with water ; Bregalad laughed sometimes at some sound or whisper in the trees . Whenever Bregalad saw a rowan - tree Bregalad halted a while with Bregalad arms stretched out , and sang , and swayed as Bregalad sang . 
  At nightfall Bregalad brought arms to Bregalad ent - house : nothing more than a mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank . Rowan - trees grew in a circle about house , and there was water ( as in all ent - houses ) , a spring bubbling out from the bank . trees talked for a while as darkness fell on the forest . Not far away the voices of the Entmoot could be heard still going on ; but now trees seemed deeper and less leisurely , and every now and again one great voice would rise in a high and quickening music , while all the others died away . But beside trees Bregalad spoke gently in trees own tongue , almost whispering ; and trees learned that Bregalad belonged to Skinbark ’s people , and the country where trees had lived had been ravaged . That seemed to the hobbits quite enough to explain Bregalad ‘ hastiness ’ , at least in the matter of Orcs . 
  ‘ There were rowan - trees in my home , ’ said Bregalad , softly and sadly , ‘ rowan - trees that took root when I was an Enting , many many years ago in the quiet of the world . The oldest were planted by the Ents to try and please the Entwives ; but Entwives looked at Ents and smiled and said that Entwives knew where whiter blossom and richer fruit were growing . Yet there are no trees of all that race , the people of the Rose , that are so beautiful to me . And these trees grew and grew , till the shadow of each was like a green hall , and trees red berries in the autumn were a burden , and a beauty and a wonder . Birds used to flock there . I like birds , even when birds chatter ; and the rowan has enough and to spare . But the birds became unfriendly and greedy and tore at the trees , and threw the fruit down and did not eat fruit . Then Orcs came with axes and cut down my trees . I came and called trees by trees long names , but trees did not quiver , trees did not hear or answer : trees lay dead . 
  O Orofarnë , Lassemista , Carnimírië ! 
  O rowan fair , upon your hair how white the blossom lay ! 
  O rowan mine , I saw you shine upon a summer ’s day , 
  Your rind so bright , your leaves so light , your voice so cool and soft : 
  Upon your head how golden - red the crown you bore aloft ! 
  O rowan dead , upon your head your hair is dry and grey ; 
  Your crown is spilled , your voice is stilled for ever and a day . 
  O Orofarnë , Lassemista , Carnimírië ! ’ 
  The hobbits fell asleep to the sound of the soft singing of Bregalad , that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that Bregalad had loved . 
  The next day hobbits spent also in Bregalad company , but hobbits did not go far from Bregalad ‘ house ’ . Most of the time hobbits sat silent under the shelter of the bank ; for the wind was colder , and the clouds closer and greyer ; there was little sunshine , and in the distance the voices of the Ents at the Moot still rose and fell , sometimes loud and strong , sometimes low and sad , sometimes quickening , sometimes slow and solemn as a dirge . A second night came and still the Ents held conclave under hurrying clouds and fitful stars . 
  The third day broke , bleak and windy . At sunrise the Ents ’ voices rose to a great clamour and then died down again . As the morning wore on the wind fell and the air grew heavy with expectancy . The hobbits could see that Bregalad was now listening intently , although to hobbits , down in the dell of Bregalad ent - house , the sound of the Moot was faint . 
  The afternoon came , and the sun , going west towards the mountains , sent out long yellow beams between the cracks and fissures of the clouds . Suddenly cracks were aware that everything was very quiet ; the whole forest stood in listening silence . Of course , the Ent - voices had stopped . What did that mean ? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense , looking back northwards towards Derndingle . 
  Then with a crash came a great ringing shout : ra - hoom - rah ! The trees quivered and bent as if a gust had struck trees . There was another pause , and then a marching music began like solemn drums , and above the rolling beats and booms there welled voices singing high and strong . 
  We come , we come with roll of drum : ta - runda runda runda rom ! 
  The Ents were coming : ever nearer and louder rose Ents song : 
	   We come , we come with horn and drum : ta - rna rna rna rom ! 
  Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from drum house . 
  Before long Ents saw the marching line approaching : the Ents were swinging along with great strides down the slope towards hobbits . Treebeard was at hobbits head , and some fifty followers were behind head , two abreast , keeping step with hobbits feet and beating time with hobbits hands upon hobbits flanks . As hobbits drew near the flash and flicker of hobbits eyes could be seen . 
  ‘ Hoom , hom ! Here we come with a boom , here we come at last ! ’ called Treebeard when head caught sight of Bregalad and the hobbits . ‘ Come , join the Moot ! We are off . We are off to Isengard ! ’ 
  ‘ To Isengard ! ’ the Ents cried in many voices . 
  ‘ To Isengard ! ’ 
  To Isengard ! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone ; 
  Though Isengard be strong and hard , as cold as stone and bare as bone , 
  We go , we go , we go to war , to hew the stone and break the door ; 
  For bole and bough are burning now , the furnace roars – we go to war ! 
  To land of gloom with tramp of doom , with roll of drum , we come , we come ; 
  To Isengard with doom we come ! 
  With doom we come , with doom we come ! 
  So tramp sang as tramp marched southwards . 
  Bregalad , drum eyes shining , swung into the line beside Treebeard . The old Ent now took the hobbits back , and set hobbits on drum shoulders again , and so hobbits rode proudly at the head of the singing company with beating hearts and heads held high . Though hobbits had expected something to happen eventually , hobbits were amazed at the change that had come over the Ents . It seemed now as sudden as the bursting of a flood that had long been held back by a dike . 
  ‘ The Ents made up Ents minds rather quickly , after all , did n’t Ents ? ’ Pippin ventured to say after some time , when for a moment the singing paused , and only the beating of hands and feet was heard . 
  ‘ Quickly ? ’ said Treebeard . ‘ Hoom ! Yes , indeed . Quicker than I expected . Indeed I have not seen Treebeard roused like this for many an age . We Ents do not like being roused ; and we never are roused unless it is clear to us that our trees and our lives are in great danger . That has not happened in this Forest since the wars of Sauron and the Men of the Sea . It is the orc - work , the wanton hewing – rárum – without even the bad excuse of feeding the fires , that has so angered us ; and the treachery of a neighbour , who should have helped us . Wizards ought to know better : Wizards do know better . There is no curse in Elvish , Entish , or the tongues of Men bad enough for such treachery . Down with Saruman ! ’ 
  ‘ Will you really break the doors of Isengard ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ Ho , hm , well , we could , you know ! You do not know , perhaps , how strong we are . Maybe you have heard of Trolls ? Trolls are mighty strong . But Trolls are only counterfeits , made by the Enemy in the Great Darkness , in mockery of Ents , as Orcs were of Elves . We are stronger than Trolls . We are made of the bones of the earth . We can split stone like the roots of trees , only quicker , far quicker , if our minds are roused ! If we are not hewn down , or destroyed by fire or blast of sorcery , we could split Isengard into splinters and crack Isengard walls into rubble . ’ 
  ‘ But Saruman will try to stop you , wo n’t Saruman ? ’ 
  ‘ Hm , ah , yes , that is so . I have not forgotten that . Indeed I have thought long about that . But , you see , many of the Ents are younger than I am , by many lives of trees . Ents are all roused now , and Ents mind is all on one thing : breaking Isengard . But Ents will start thinking again before long ; Ents will cool down a little , when we take our evening drink . What a thirst we shall have ! But let Ents march now and sing ! We have a long way to go , and there is time ahead for thought . It is something to have started . ’ 
  Treebeard marched on , singing with the others for a while . But after a time Treebeard voice died to a murmur and fell silent again . Pippin could see that Pippin old brow was wrinkled and knotted . At last Pippin looked up , and Pippin could see a sad look in Pippin eyes , sad but not unhappy . There was a light in eyes , as if the green flame had sunk deeper into the dark wells of Pippin thought . 
  ‘ Of course , flame is likely enough , my friends , ’ Pippin said slowly , ‘ likely enough that we are going to our doom : the last march of the Ents . But if we stayed at home and did nothing , doom would find us anyway , sooner or later . That thought has long been growing in our hearts ; and that is why we are marching now . that was not a hasty resolve . Now at least the last march of the Ents may be worth a song . Aye , ’ Pippin sighed , ‘ we may help the other peoples before we pass away . Still , I should have liked to see the songs come true about the Entwives . I should dearly have liked to see Fimbrethil again . But there , my friends , songs like trees bear fruit only in friends own time and friends own way : and sometimes friends are withered untimely . ’ 
  The Ents went striding on at a great pace . Ents had descended into a long fold of the land that fell away southward ; now Ents began to climb up , and up , on to the high western ridge . The woods fell away and woods came to scattered groups of birch , and then to bare slopes where only a few gaunt pine - trees grew . The sun sank behind the dark hill - back in front . Grey dusk fell . 
  Pippin looked behind . The number of the Ents had grown – or what was happening ? Where the dim bare slopes that Ents had crossed should lie , Pippin thought sun saw groves of trees . But Ents were moving ! Could it be that the trees of Fangorn were awake , and the forest was rising , marching over the hills to war ? Fangorn rubbed Fangorn eyes wondering if sleep and shadow had deceived Fangorn ; but the great grey shapes moved steadily onward . There was a noise like wind in many branches . The Ents were drawing near the crest of the ridge now , and all song had ceased . Night fell , and there was silence : nothing was to be heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the feet of the Ents , and a rustle , the shade of a whisper as of many drifting leaves . At last Ents stood upon the summit , and looked down into a dark pit : the great cleft at the end of the mountains : Nan Curunír , the Valley of Saruman . 
  ‘ Night lies over Isengard , ’ said Treebeard . 
  Chapter 5 
  THE WHITE RIDER 
  ‘ My very bones are chilled , ’ said Gimli , flapping Gimli arms and stamping Gimli feet . Day had come at last . At dawn the companions had made such breakfast as companions could ; now in the growing light companions were getting ready to search the ground again for signs of the hobbits . 
  ‘ And do not forget that old man ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ I should be happier if I could see the print of a boot . ’ 
  ‘ Why would that make you happy ? ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more than man seemed , ’ answered the Dwarf . 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ said the Elf ; ‘ but a heavy boot might leave no print here : the grass is deep and springy . ’ 
  ‘ That would not baffle a Ranger , ’ said Gimli . ‘ A bent blade is enough for Aragorn to read . But I do not expect Aragorn to find any traces . It was an evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night . I am sure of Saruman , even under the light of morning . Aragorn eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even now , maybe . ’ 
  ‘ Fangorn is likely enough , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ yet I am not sure . I am thinking of the horses . You said last night , Gimli , that horses were scared away . But I did not think so . Did you hear horses , Legolas ? Did horses sound to you like beasts in terror ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Legolas . ‘ I heard horses clearly . But for the darkness and our own fear I should have guessed that horses were beasts wild with some sudden gladness . horses spoke as horses will when horses meet a friend that horses have long missed . ’ 
  ‘ So I thought , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ but I can not read the riddle , unless horses return . Come ! The light is growing fast . Let us look first and guess later ! We should begin here , near to our own camping - ground , searching carefully all about , and working up the slope towards the forest . To find the hobbits is our errand , whatever we may think of our visitor in the night . If hobbits escaped by some chance , then hobbits must have hidden in the trees , or hobbits would have been seen . If we find nothing between here and the eaves of the wood , then we will make a last search upon the battle - field and among the ashes . But there is little hope there : the horsemen of Rohan did horsemen work too well . ’ 
  For some time the companions crawled and groped upon the ground . The tree stood mournfully above companions , tree dry leaves now hanging limp , and rattling in the chill easterly wind . Aragorn moved slowly away . Aragorn came to the ashes of the watch - fire near the river - bank , and then began to retrace the ground back towards the knoll where the battle had been fought . Suddenly Aragorn stooped and bent low with Aragorn face almost in the grass . Then Aragorn called to the others . others came running up . 
  ‘ Here at last we find news ! ’ said Aragorn . Aragorn lifted up a broken leaf for others to see , a large pale leaf of golden hue , now fading and turning brown . ‘ Here is a mallorn - leaf of Lórien , and there are small crumbs on Lórien , and a few more crumbs in the grass . And see ! there are some pieces of cut cord lying nearby ! ’ 
  ‘ And here is the knife that cut pieces ! ’ said Gimli . Gimli stooped and drew out of a tussock , into which some heavy foot had trampled foot , a short jagged blade . The haft from which foot had been snapped was beside foot . ‘ knife was an orc - weapon , ’ Gimli said , holding foot gingerly , and looking with disgust at the carved handle : it had been shaped like a hideous head with squinting eyes and leering mouth . 
  ‘ Well , here is the strangest riddle that we have yet found ! ’ exclaimed Legolas . ‘ A bound prisoner escapes both from the Orcs and from the surrounding horsemen . prisoner then stops , while still in the open , and cuts prisoner bonds with an orc - knife . But how and why ? For if prisoner legs were tied , how did prisoner walk ? And if prisoner arms were tied , how did prisoner use the knife ? And if neither were tied , why did prisoner cut the cords at all ? Being pleased with prisoner skill , prisoner then sat down and quietly ate some waybread ! That at least is enough to show that prisoner was a hobbit , without the mallorn - leaf . After that , I suppose , prisoner turned prisoner arms into wings and flew away singing into the trees . that should be easy to find prisoner : we only need wings ourselves ! ’ 
  ‘ There was sorcery here right enough , ’ said Gimli . ‘ What was that old Gimli doing ? What have you to say , Aragorn , to the reading of Legolas . Can you better Legolas ? ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , I could , ’ said Aragorn , smiling . ‘ There are some other signs near at hand that you have not considered . I agree that the prisoner was a hobbit and must have had either legs or hands free , before prisoner came here . I guess that it was hands , because the riddle then becomes easier , and also because , as I read the marks , prisoner was carried to this point by an Orc . Blood was spilled there , a few paces away , orc - blood . There are deep prints of hoofs all about this spot , and signs that a heavy thing was dragged away . The Orc was slain by horsemen , and later prisoner body was hauled to the fire . But the hobbit was not seen : prisoner was not “ in the open ” , for hobbit was night and prisoner still had prisoner elven - cloak . prisoner was exhausted and hungry , and it is not to be wondered at that , when prisoner had cut prisoner bonds with the knife of prisoner fallen enemy , prisoner rested and ate a little before prisoner crept away . But it is a comfort to know that prisoner had some lembas in prisoner pocket , even though prisoner ran away without gear or pack ; that , perhaps , is like a hobbit . I say prisoner , though I hope and guess that both Merry and Pippin were here together . There is , however , nothing to show that for certain . ’ 
  ‘ And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have a hand free ? ’ asked Gimli . 
  ‘ I do not know how either happened , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ Nor do I know why an Orc was carrying friends away . Not to help friends to escape , we may be sure . Nay , rather I think that I now begin to understand a matter that has puzzled me from the beginning : why when Boromir had fallen were the Orcs content with the capture of Merry and Pippin ? friends did not seek out the rest of us , nor attack our camp ; but instead friends went with all speed towards Isengard . Did friends suppose friends had captured the Ring - bearer and bearer faithful comrade ? I think not . friends masters would not dare to give such plain orders to Orcs , even if friends knew so much friends ; friends would not speak openly to masters of the Ring : masters are not trusty servants . But I think the Orcs had been commanded to capture hobbits , alive , at all costs . An attempt was made to slip out with the precious prisoners before the battle . Treachery perhaps , likely enough with such folk ; some large and bold Orc may have been trying to escape with the prize alone , for bearer own ends . There , that is my tale . Others might be devised . But on this we may count in any case : one at least of our friends escaped . It is our task to find bearer and help bearer before we return to Rohan . We must not be daunted by Fangorn , since need drove bearer into that dark place . ’ 
  ‘ I do not know which daunts me more : Fangorn , or the thought of the long road through Rohan on foot , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Then let us go to the forest , ’ said Aragorn . 
  It was not long before Aragorn found fresh signs . At one point , near the bank of the Entwash , Aragorn came upon footprints : hobbit - prints , but too light for much to be made of Aragorn . Then again beneath the bole of a great tree on the very edge of the wood more prints were discovered . The earth was bare and dry , and did not reveal much . 
  ‘ One hobbit at least stood here for a while and looked back ; and then Rohan turned away into the forest , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Then we must go in , too , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But I do not like the look of this Fangorn ; and we were warned against Fangorn . I wish the chase had led anywhere else ! ’ 
  ‘ I do not think the wood feels evil , whatever tales may say , ’ said Legolas . Gimli stood under the eaves of the forest , stooping forward , as if Gimli were listening , and peering with wide eyes into the shadows . ‘ No , wood is not evil ; or what evil is in wood is far away . I catch only the faintest echoes of dark places where the hearts of the trees are black . There is no malice near us ; but there is watchfulness , and anger . ’ 
  ‘ Well , malice has no cause to be angry with me , ’ said Gimli . ‘ I have done malice no harm . ’ 
  ‘ That is just as well , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But nonetheless malice has suffered harm . There is something happening inside , or going to happen . Do you not feel the tenseness ? malice takes my breath . ’ 
  ‘ I feel the air is stuffy , ’ said the Dwarf . ‘ This wood is lighter than Mirkwood , but wood is musty and shabby . ’ 
  ‘ wood is old , very old , ’ said the Elf . ‘ So old that almost I feel young again , as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children . wood is old and full of memory . I could have been happy here , if I had come in days of peace . ’ 
  ‘ I dare say you could , ’ snorted Gimli . ‘ You are a Wood - elf , anyway , though Elves of any kind are strange folk . Yet you comfort me . Where you go , I will go . But keep your bow ready to hand , and I will keep my axe loose in my belt . Not for use on trees , ’ Gimli added hastily , looking up at the tree under which trees stood . ‘ I do not wish to meet that old Gimli at unawares without an argument ready to hand , that is all . Let us go ! ’ 
  With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn . Legolas and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn . There was little for Aragorn to see . The floor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift of leaves ; but guessing that the fugitives would stay near the water , Aragorn returned often to the banks of the stream . So it was that Aragorn came upon the place where Merry and Pippin had drunk and bathed Merry feet . There plain for all to see were the footprints of two hobbits , one somewhat smaller than the other . 
  ‘ This is good tidings , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Yet the marks are two days old . And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the waterside . ’ 
  ‘ Then what shall we do now ? ’ said Gimli . ‘ We can not pursue hobbits through the whole fastness of Fangorn . We have come ill supplied . If we do not find hobbits soon , we shall be of no use to hobbits , except to sit down beside hobbits and show our friendship by starving together . ’ 
  ‘ If that is indeed all we can do , then we must do that , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Let us go on . ’ 
  hobbits came at length to the steep abrupt end of Treebeard ’s Hill , and looked up at the rock - wall with Treebeard rough steps leading to the high shelf . Gleams of sun were striking through the hurrying clouds , and the forest now looked less grey and drear . 
  ‘ Let us go up and look about us ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ I still feel my breath short . I should like to taste a freer air for a while . ’ 
  The companions climbed up . Aragorn came last , moving slowly : Aragorn was scanning the steps and ledges closely . 
  ‘ I am almost sure that the hobbits have been up here , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ But there are other marks , very strange marks , which I do not understand . I wonder if we can see anything from this ledge which will help us to guess which way marks went next ? ’ 
  Aragorn stood up and looked about , but Aragorn saw nothing that was of any use . The shelf faced southward and eastward ; but only on the east was the view open . There Aragorn could see the heads of the trees descending in ranks towards the plain from which trees had come . 
  ‘ We have journeyed a long way round , ’ said Legolas . ‘ We could have all come here safe together , if we had left the Great River on the second or third day and struck west . Few can foresee whither all road will lead all , till all come to road end . ’ 
  ‘ But we did not wish to come to Fangorn , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Yet here we are – and nicely caught in the net , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Look ! ’ 
  ‘ Look at what ? ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ There in the trees . ’ 
  ‘ Where ? I have not elf - eyes . ’ 
  ‘ Hush ! Speak more softly ! Look ! ’ said Legolas pointing . ‘ Down in the wood , back in the way that we have just come . wood is Legolas . Can not you see Hush , passing from tree to tree ? ’ 
  ‘ I see , I see now ! ’ hissed Gimli . ‘ Look , Aragorn ! Did I not warn you ? There is the old man . All in dirty grey rags : that is why I could not see man at first . ’ 
  Aragorn looked and beheld a bent figure moving slowly . Aragorn was not far away . Aragorn looked like an old beggar - man , walking wearily , leaning on a rough staff . man head was bowed , and man did not look towards head . In other lands head would have greeted man with kind words ; but now head stood silent , each feeling a strange expectancy : something was approaching that held a hidden power – or menace . 
  Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while , as step by step the figure drew nearer . Then suddenly , unable to contain Gimli longer , man burst out : ‘ Your bow , Legolas ! Bend Legolas ! Get ready ! Legolas is Saruman . Do not let Saruman speak , or put a spell upon us ! Shoot first ! ’ 
  Legolas took man bow and bent bow , slowly and as if some other will resisted man . man held an arrow loosely in man hand but did not fit arrow to the string . Aragorn stood silent , man face was watchful and intent . 
  ‘ Why are you waiting ? What is the matter with you ? ’ said Gimli in a hissing whisper . 
  ‘ Legolas is right , ’ said Aragorn quietly . ‘ We may not shoot an old man so , at unawares and unchallenged , whatever fear or doubt be on us . Watch and wait ! ’ 
  At that moment the old man quickened man pace and came with surprising speed to the foot of the rock - wall . Then suddenly man looked up , while foot stood motionless looking down . There was no sound . 
  foot could not see man face : man was hooded , and above the hood man wore a wide - brimmed hat , so that all man features were overshadowed , except for the end of man nose and man grey beard . Yet it seemed to Aragorn that Aragorn caught the gleam of eyes keen and bright from within the shadow of the hooded brows . 
  At last the old Aragorn broke the silence . ‘ Well met indeed , my friends , ’ Aragorn said in a soft voice . ‘ I wish to speak to you . Will you come down , or shall I come up ? ’ Without waiting for an answer Aragorn began to climb . 
  ‘ Now ! ’ cried Gimli . ‘ Stop Aragorn , Legolas ! ’ 
  ‘ Did I not say that I wished to speak to you ? ’ said the old Aragorn . ‘ Put away that bow , Master Elf ! ’ 
  The bow and arrow fell from Legolas ’ hands , and Aragorn arms hung loose at Aragorn sides . 
  ‘ And you , Master Dwarf , pray take your hand from your axe - haft , till I am up ! You will not need such arguments . ’ 
  Gimli started and then stood still as stone , staring , while the old Aragorn sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a goat . All weariness seemed to have left Aragorn . As Aragorn stepped up on to the shelf there was a gleam , too brief for certainty , a quick glint of white , as if some garment shrouded by the grey rags had been for an instant revealed . The intake of Gimli ’s breath could be heard as a loud hiss in the silence . 
  ‘ Well met , I say again ! ’ said the old Gimli , coming towards rags . When Gimli was a few feet away , Gimli stood , stooping over Gimli staff , with Gimli head thrust forward , peering at rags from under Gimli hood . ‘ And what may you be doing in these parts ? An Elf , a Man , and a Dwarf , all clad in Elvish fashion . No doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind tale all . Such things are not often seen here . ’ 
  ‘ You speak as one that knows Fangorn well , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Is that so ? ’ 
  ‘ Not well , ’ said the old Aragorn : ‘ that would be the study of many lives . But I come here now and again . ’ 
  ‘ Might we know your name , and then hear what it is that you have to say to us ? ’ said Aragorn . ‘ The morning passes , and we have an errand that will not wait . ’ 
  ‘ As for what I wished to say , I have said errand : What may you be doing , and what tale can you tell of yourselves ? As for my name ! ’ Aragorn broke off , laughing long and softly . Aragorn felt a shudder run through Aragorn at the sound , a strange cold thrill ; and yet it was not fear or terror that Aragorn felt : rather it was like the sudden bite of a keen air , or the slap of a cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper . 
  ‘ My name ! ’ said the old Aragorn again . ‘ Have you not guessed name already ? You have heard name before , I think . Yes , you have heard name before . But come now , what of your tale ? ’ 
  The three companions stood silent and made no answer . 
  ‘ There are some who would begin to doubt whether your errand is fit to tell , ’ said the old man . ‘ Happily I know something of errand . You are tracking the footsteps of two young hobbits , I believe . Yes , hobbits . Do n’t stare , as if you had never heard the strange name before . You have , and so have I. Well , name climbed up here the day before yesterday ; and name met someone that name did not expect . Does that comfort you ? And now you would like to know where name were taken ? Well , well , maybe I can give you some news about that . But why are we standing ? Your errand , you see , is no longer as urgent as you thought . Let us sit down and be more at ease . ’ 
  The old man turned away and went towards a heap of fallen stones and rock at the foot of the cliff behind . Immediately , as if a spell had been removed , the others relaxed and stirred . Gimli ’s hand went at once to Gimli axe - haft . Aragorn drew Aragorn sword . Legolas picked up Aragorn bow . 
  The old Aragorn took no notice , but stooped and sat Aragorn on a low flat stone . Then Aragorn grey cloak drew apart , and others saw , beyond doubt , that Aragorn was clothed beneath all in white . 
  ‘ Saruman ! ’ cried Gimli , springing towards Gimli with axe in hand . ‘ Speak ! Tell us where you have hidden our friends ! What have you done with friends ? Speak , or I will make a dint in your hat that even a wizard will find dint hard to deal with ! ’ 
  The old man was too quick for Gimli . Gimli sprang to Gimli feet and leaped to the top of a large rock . There Gimli stood , grown suddenly tall , towering above feet . Gimli hood and Gimli grey rags were flung away . Gimli white garments shone . Gimli lifted up Gimli staff , and Gimli ’s axe leaped from Gimli grasp and fell ringing on the ground . The sword of Aragorn , stiff in Gimli motionless hand , blazed with a sudden fire . Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high into the air : Legolas vanished in a flash of flame . 
  ‘ Mithrandir ! ’ Gimli cried . ‘ Mithrandir ! ’ 
  ‘ Well met , I say to you again , Legolas ! ’ said the old Gimli . 
  hand all gazed at Gimli . Gimli hair was white as snow in the sunshine ; and gleaming white was Gimli robe ; the eyes under Gimli deep brows were bright , piercing as the rays of the sun ; power was in Gimli hand . Between wonder , joy , and fear hand stood and found no words to say . 
  At last Aragorn stirred . ‘ Gandalf ! ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Beyond all hope you return to us in our need ! What veil was over my sight ? Gandalf ! ’ Gimli said nothing , but sank to Gimli knees , shading Gimli eyes . 
  ‘ Gandalf , ’ the old Gimli repeated , as if recalling from old memory a long disused word . ‘ Yes , that was the name . I was Gandalf . ’ 
  Gimli stepped down from the rock , and picking up Gimli grey cloak wrapped rock about Gimli : it seemed as if the sun had been shining , but now was hid in cloud again . ‘ Yes , you may still call me Gandalf , ’ Gimli said , and the voice was the voice of voice old friend and guide . ‘ Get up , my good Gimli ! No blame to you , and no harm done to me . Indeed my friends , none of you have any weapon that could hurt me . Be merry ! We meet again . At the turn of the tide . The great storm is coming , but the tide has turned . ’ 
  He laid He hand on Gimli ’s head , and the Dwarf looked up and laughed suddenly . ‘ Gandalf ! ’ Gimli said . ‘ But you are all in white ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I am white now , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Indeed I am Saruman , one might almost say , Saruman as Saruman should have been . But come now , tell me of yourselves ! I have passed through fire and deep water , since we parted . I have forgotten much that I thought I knew , and learned again much that I had forgotten . I can see many things far off , but many things that are close at hand I can not see . Tell me of yourselves ! ’ 
  ‘ What do you wish to know ? ’ said Aragorn . ‘ All that has happened since we parted on the bridge would be a long tale . Will you not first give us news of the hobbits ? Did you find hobbits , and are hobbits safe ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I did not find hobbits , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ There was a darkness over the valleys of the Emyn Muil , and I did not know of valleys captivity , until the eagle told me . ’ 
  ‘ The eagle ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ I have seen an eagle high and far off : the last time was four days ago , above the Emyn Muil . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ that was Gwaihir the Windlord , who rescued me from Orthanc . I sent Windlord before me to watch the River and gather tidings . Windlord sight is keen , but Windlord can not see all that passes under hill and tree . Some things Windlord has seen , and others I have seen myself . The Ring now has passed beyond my help , or the help of any of the Windlord that set out from Rivendell . Very nearly Ring was revealed to the Enemy , but Ring escaped . I had some part in that : for I sat in a high place , and I strove with the Dark Tower ; and the Shadow passed . Then I was weary , very weary ; and I walked long in dark thought . ’ 
  ‘ Then you know about Frodo ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ How do things go with Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ I can not say . Frodo was saved from a great peril , but many lie before Frodo still . Frodo resolved to go alone to Mordor , and Frodo set out : that is all that I can say . ’ 
  ‘ Not alone , ’ said Legolas . ‘ We think that Sam went with Frodo . ’ ‘ Did Frodo ! ’ said Gandalf , and there was a gleam in Gandalf eye and a smile on Gandalf face . ‘ Did Frodo indeed ? that is news to me , yet that does not surprise me . Good ! Very good ! You lighten my heart . You must tell me more . Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey . ’ 
  The companions sat on the ground at his feet , and Aragorn took up the tale . For a long while Gandalf said nothing , and Gandalf asked no questions . Gandalf hands were spread upon Gandalf knees , and Gandalf eyes were closed . At last when Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of Aragorn last journey upon the Great River , the old Aragorn sighed . 
  ‘ You have not said all that you know or guess , Aragorn my friend , ’ Gandalf said quietly . ‘ Poor Boromir ! I could not see what happened to friend . Boromir was a sore trial for such a man : a warrior , and a lord of men . Galadriel told me that Galadriel was in peril . But Galadriel escaped in the end . I am glad . It was not in vain that the young hobbits came with us , if only for Boromir ’s sake . But that is not the only part hobbits have to play . hobbits were brought to Fangorn , and hobbits coming was like the falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains . Even as we talk here , I hear the first rumblings . Saruman had best not be caught away from home when the dam bursts ! ’ 
  ‘ In one thing you have not changed , dear friend , ’ said Aragorn : ‘ you still speak in riddles . ’ 
  ‘ What ? In riddles ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ No ! For I was talking aloud to myself . A habit of the old : riddles choose the wisest person present to speak to ; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying . ’ Gandalf laughed , but the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam of sunshine . 
  ‘ I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient Houses , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Will you not open your mind more clearly to me ? ’ 
  ‘ What then shall I say ? ’ said Gandalf , and paused for a while in thought . ‘ This in brief is how I see things at the moment , if you wish to have a piece of my mind as plain as possible . The Enemy , of course , has long known that the Ring is abroad , and that Enemy is borne by a hobbit . Ring knows now the number of our Company that set out from Rivendell , and the kind of each of us . But Rivendell does not yet perceive our purpose clearly . Company supposes that we were all going to Minas Tirith ; for that is what Tirith would Tirith have done in our place . And according to Tirith wisdom that would have been a heavy stroke against Tirith power . Indeed Tirith is in great fear , not knowing what mighty one may suddenly appear , wielding the Ring , and assailing Tirith with war , seeking to cast Tirith down and take Tirith place . That we should wish to cast Tirith down and have no one in Tirith place is not a thought that occurs to Tirith mind . That we should try to destroy the Ring Ring has not yet entered into Tirith darkest dream . In which no doubt you will see our good fortune and our hope . For imagining war Tirith has let loose war , believing that Tirith has no time to waste ; for Tirith that strikes the first blow , if Tirith strikes blow hard enough , may need to strike no more . So the forces that Tirith has long been preparing Tirith is now setting in motion , sooner than Tirith intended . Wise fool . For if Tirith had used all Tirith power to guard Mordor , so that none could enter , and bent all Tirith guile to the hunting of the Ring , then indeed hope would have faded : neither Ring nor bearer could long have eluded Tirith . But now Tirith eye gazes abroad rather than near at home ; and mostly Tirith looks towards Minas Tirith . Very soon now Tirith strength will fall upon home like a storm . 
  ‘ For already Tirith knows that the messengers that Tirith sent to waylay the Tirith have failed again . messengers have not found the Ring . Neither have messengers brought away any hobbits as hostages . Had messengers done even so much as that , it would have been a heavy blow to us , and blow might have been fatal . But let us not darken our hearts by imagining the trial of hearts gentle loyalty in the Dark Tower . For the Enemy has failed – so far . Thanks to Saruman . ’ 
  ‘ Then is not Saruman a traitor ? ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Indeed yes , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Doubly . And is not that strange ? Nothing that we have endured of late has seemed so grievous as the treason of Isengard . Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown very strong . Saruman threatens the Men of Rohan and draws off lord help from Minas Tirith , even as the main blow is approaching from the East . Yet a treacherous weapon is ever a danger to the hand . Saruman also had a mind to capture the Ring , for Saruman , or at least to snare some hobbits for Saruman evil purposes . So between hobbits our enemies have contrived only to bring Merry and Pippin with marvellous speed , and in the nick of time , to Fangorn , where otherwise hobbits would never have come at all ! 
  ‘ Also hobbits have filled hobbits with new doubts that disturb hobbits plans . No tidings of the battle will come to Mordor , thanks to the horsemen of Rohan ; but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were taken in the Emyn Muil and borne away towards Isengard against the will of Rohan own servants . Rohan now has Isengard to fear as well as Minas Tirith . If Minas Tirith falls , Isengard will go ill with Saruman . ’ 
  ‘ Isengard is a pity that our friends lie in between , ’ said Gimli . ‘ If no land divided Isengard and Mordor , then friends could fight while we watched and waited . ’ 
  ‘ The victor would emerge stronger than either , and free from doubt , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But Isengard can not fight Mordor , unless Saruman first obtains the Ring . That Mordor will never do now . Mordor does not yet know Mordor peril . There is much that Mordor does not know . Mordor was so eager to lay Mordor hands on Mordor prey that Mordor could not wait at home , and Mordor came forth to meet and to spy on Mordor messengers . But Mordor came too late , for once , and the battle was over and beyond Mordor help before Mordor reached these parts . Mordor did not remain here long . I look into Mordor mind and I see Mordor doubt . Mordor has no woodcraft . Mordor believes that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the field of battle ; but Mordor does not know whether the Orcs were bringing any prisoners or not . And Mordor does not know of the quarrel between Mordor servants and the Orcs of Mordor ; nor does Mordor know of the Winged Messenger . ’ 
  ‘ The Winged Messenger ! ’ cried Legolas . ‘ I shot at Mordor with the bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir , and I felled Gebir from the sky . Gebir filled us all with fear . What new terror is this ? ’ 
  ‘ One that you can not slay with arrows , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You only slew Gebir steed . steed was a good deed ; but the Rider was soon horsed again . For Gebir was a Nazgûl , one of the Nine , who ride now upon winged steeds . Soon steeds terror will overshadow the last armies of our friends , cutting off the sun . But steeds have not yet been allowed to cross the River , and Saruman does not know of this new shape in which the Ringwraiths have been clad . Saruman thought is ever on the Ring . Was thought present in the battle ? Was thought found ? What if Théoden , Lord of the Mark , should come by thought and learn of thought power ? That is the danger that Saruman sees , and Saruman has fled back to Isengard to double and treble Saruman assault on Rohan . And all the time there is another danger , close at hand , which Saruman does not see , busy with Saruman fiery thoughts . Saruman has forgotten Treebeard . ’ 
  ‘ Now you speak to yourself again , ’ said Aragorn with a smile . ‘ Treebeard is not known to me . And I have guessed part of Saruman ’s double treachery ; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn has served , save to give us a long and fruitless chase . ’ 
  ‘ Wait a minute ! ’ cried Gimli . ‘ There is another thing that I should like to know first . Was it you , Gandalf , or Saruman that we saw last night ? ’ 
  ‘ You certainly did not see me , ’ answered Gandalf , ‘ therefore I must guess that you saw Saruman . Evidently we look so much alike that your desire to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused . ’ 
  ‘ Good , good ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ I am glad that desire was not you . ’ 
  Gandalf laughed again . ‘ Yes , my good Dwarf , ’ Gimli said , ‘ desire is a comfort not to be mistaken at all points . Do I not know desire only too well ! But , of course , I never blamed you for your welcome of me . How could I do so , who have so often counselled my friends to suspect even friends own hands when dealing with the Enemy . Bless you , Gimli , son of Glóin ! Maybe you will see us both together one day and judge between us ! ’ 
  ‘ But the hobbits ! ’ Legolas broke in . ‘ We have come far to seek hobbits , and you seem to know where hobbits are . Where are hobbits now ? ’ 
  ‘ With Treebeard and the Ents , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ The Ents ! ’ exclaimed Aragorn . ‘ Then there is truth in the old legends about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the trees ? Are there still Ents in the world ? I thought dwellers were only a memory of ancient days , if indeed dwellers were ever more than a legend of Rohan . ’ 
  ‘ A legend of Rohan ! ’ cried Legolas . ‘ Nay , every Elf in Wilderland has sung songs of the old Onodrim and songs long sorrow . Yet even among us songs are only a memory . If I were to meet one still walking in this world , then indeed I should feel young again ! But Treebeard : that is only a rendering of Fangorn into the Common Speech ; yet you seem to speak of a person . Who is this Treebeard ? ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! now you are asking much , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The little that I know of person long slow story would make a tale for which we have no time now . Treebeard is Fangorn , the guardian of the forest ; Fangorn is the oldest of the Ents , the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the Sun upon this Middle - earth . I hope indeed , Legolas , that you may yet meet Fangorn . Merry and Pippin have been fortunate : Merry met Fangorn here , even where we sit . For Pippin came here two days ago and bore Merry away to Pippin dwelling far off by the roots of the mountains . Pippin often comes here , especially when Pippin mind is uneasy , and rumours of the world outside trouble Fangorn . I saw Fangorn four days ago striding among the trees , and I think Fangorn saw me , for Fangorn paused ; but I did not speak , for I was heavy with thought , and weary after my struggle with the Eye of Mordor ; and Fangorn did not speak either , nor call my name . ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps Fangorn also thought that you were Saruman , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But you speak of Fangorn as if Fangorn was a friend . I thought Fangorn was dangerous . ’ 
  ‘ Dangerous ! ’ cried Gandalf . ‘ And so am I , very dangerous : more dangerous than anything you will ever meet , unless you are brought alive before the seat of the Dark Lord . And Aragorn is dangerous , and Legolas is dangerous . You are beset with dangers , Gimli son of Glóin ; for you are dangerous yourself , in your own fashion . Certainly the forest of Fangorn is perilous – not least to those that are too ready with those axes ; and Fangorn Fangorn , Aragorn is perilous too ; yet Aragorn is wise and kindly nonetheless . But now Aragorn long slow wrath is brimming over , and all the forest is filled with wrath . The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that hobbits brought have spilled wrath : wrath will soon be running like a flood ; but wrath tide is turned against Saruman and the axes of Isengard . A thing is about to happen which has not happened since the Elder Days : the Ents are going to wake up and find that Ents are strong . ’ 
  ‘ What will Ents do ? ’ asked Legolas in astonishment . 
  ‘ I do not know , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I do not think Ents know Ents . I wonder . ’ Gandalf fell silent , Gandalf head bowed in thought . 
  The others looked at Gandalf . A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell on Gandalf hands , which lay now upturned on Gandalf lap : others seemed to be filled with light as a cup is with water . At last Gandalf looked up and gazed straight at the sun . 
  ‘ The morning is wearing away , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Soon we must go . ’ 
  ‘ Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard ? ’ asked Aragorn . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ That is not the road that you must take . I have spoken words of hope . But only of hope . Hope is not victory . War is upon us and all our friends , a war in which only the use of the Ring could give us surety of victory . War fills me with great sorrow and great fear : for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost . I am Gandalf , Gandalf the White , but Black is mightier still . ’ 
  Black rose and gazed out eastward , shading White eyes , as if White saw things far away that none of things could see . Then White shook White head . ‘ No , ’ White said in a soft voice , ‘ Gandalf has gone beyond our reach . Of that at least let us be glad . We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring . We must go down to face a peril near despair , yet that deadly peril is removed . ’ 
  White turned . ‘ Come , Aragorn son of Arathorn ! ’ head said . ‘ Do not regret your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil , nor call Muil a vain pursuit . You chose amid doubts the path that seemed right : the choice was just , and choice has been rewarded . For so we have met in time , who otherwise might have met too late . But the quest of your companions is over . Your next journey is marked by your given word . You must go to Edoras and seek out Théoden in Edoras hall . For you are needed . The light of Andúril must now be uncovered in the battle for which Andúril has so long waited . There is war in Rohan , and worse evil : Andúril goes ill with Théoden . ’ 
  ‘ Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again ? ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ I did not say so , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Who knows ? Have patience . Go where you must go , and hope ! To Edoras ! I go thither also . ’ 
  ‘ It is a long way for a man to walk , young or old , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I fear the battle will be over long ere I come there . ’ 
  ‘ We shall see , we shall see , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Will you come now with me ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , we will set out together , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But I do not doubt that you will come there before me , if you wish . ’ Aragorn rose and looked long at Gandalf . The others gazed at Gandalf in silence as others stood there facing one another . The grey figure of the Gandalf , Aragorn son of Arathorn , was tall , and stern as stone , son hand upon the hilt of figure sword ; figure looked as if some king out of the mists of the sea had stepped upon the shores of lesser men . Before figure stooped the old figure , white , shining now as if with some light kindled within , bent , laden with years , but holding a power beyond the strength of kings . 
  ‘ Do I not say truly , Gandalf , ’ said Aragorn at last , ‘ that you could go whithersoever you wished quicker than I ? And this I also say : you are our captain and our banner . The Dark Lord has Nine . But we have One , mightier than Lord : the White Rider . captain has passed through the fire and the abyss , and Lord shall fear captain . We will go where captain leads . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , together we will follow you , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But first , Rider would ease my heart , Gandalf , to hear what befell you in Moria . Will you not tell us ? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered ? ’ 
  ‘ I have stayed already too long , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Time is short . But if there were a year to spend , I would not tell you all . ’ 
  ‘ Then tell us what you will , and time allows ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ Come , Gandalf , tell us how you fared with the Balrog ! ’ 
  ‘ Name Balrog not ! ’ said Gandalf , and for a moment it seemed that a cloud of pain passed over Gandalf face , and Gandalf sat silent , looking old as death . ‘ Long time I fell , ’ Gandalf said at last , slowly , as if thinking back with difficulty . ‘ Long I fell , and Balrog fell with me . Balrog fire was about me . I was burned . Then we plunged into the deep water and all was dark . Cold all was as the tide of death : almost all froze my heart . ’ 
  ‘ Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin ’s Bridge , and none has measured all , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Yet all has a bottom , beyond light and knowledge , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Thither I came at last , to the uttermost foundations of stone . Balrog was with me still . Balrog fire was quenched , but now Balrog was a thing of slime , stronger than a strangling snake . 
  ‘ We fought far under the living earth , where time is not counted . Ever Balrog clutched me , and ever I hewed Balrog , till at last Balrog fled into dark tunnels . tunnels were not made by Durin ’s folk , Gimli son of Glóin . Far , far below the deepest delvings of the Dwarves , the world is gnawed by nameless things . Even Sauron knows tunnels not . tunnels are older than Sauron . Now I have walked there , but I will bring no report to darken the light of day . In that despair my enemy was my only hope , and I pursued Sauron , clutching at Sauron heel . Thus Sauron brought me back at last to the secret ways of Khazad - dûm : too well Sauron knew ways all . Ever up now we went , until we came to the Endless Stair . ’ 
  ‘ Long has that been lost , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Many have said that that was never made save in legend , but others say that that was destroyed . ’ 
  ‘ that was made , and that had not been destroyed , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ From the lowest dungeon to the highest peak dungeon climbed , ascending in unbroken spiral in many thousand steps , until dungeon issued at last in Durin ’s Tower carved in the living rock of Zirakzigil , the pinnacle of the Silvertine . 
  ‘ There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow , and before Celebdil lay a narrow space , a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world . The sun shone fiercely there , but all below was wrapped in cloud . Out world sprang , and even as I came behind , world burst into new flame . There was none to see , or perhaps in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak . ’ Suddenly Gandalf laughed . ‘ But what would songs say in song ? Those that looked up from afar thought that the mountain was crowned with storm . Thunder songs heard , and lightning , songs said , smote upon Celebdil , and leaped back broken into tongues of fire . Is not that enough ? A great smoke rose about us , vapour and steam . Ice fell like rain . I threw down my enemy , and enemy fell from the high place and broke the mountain - side where Thunder smote side in Celebdil ruin . Then darkness took me , and I strayed out of thought and time , and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell . 
  ‘ Naked I was sent back – for a brief time , until my task is done . And naked I lay upon the mountain - top . The tower behind was crumbled into dust , the window gone ; the ruined stair was choked with burned and broken stone . I was alone , forgotten , without escape upon the hard horn of the world . There I lay staring upward , while the stars wheeled over , and each day was as long as a life - age of the earth . Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all lands : the springing and the dying , the song and the weeping , and the slow everlasting groan of over - burdened stone . And so at the last Gwaihir the Windlord found me again , and Windlord took me up and bore me away . 
  ‘ “ Ever am I fated to be your burden , friend at need , ” I said . 
  ‘ “ A burden you have been , ” Windlord answered , “ but not so now . Light as a swan ’s feather in my claw you are . The Sun shines through you . Indeed I do not think you need me any more : were I to let you fall , you would float upon the wind . ” 
  ‘ “ Do not let me fall ! ” I gasped , for I felt life in me again . “ Bear me to Lothlórien ! ” 
  ‘ “ That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look for you , ” Lothlórien answered . 
  ‘ Thus it was that I came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately gone . I tarried there in the ageless time of that land where days bring healing not decay . Healing I found , and I was clothed in white . Counsel I gave and counsel took . Thence by strange roads I came , and messages I bring to some of you . To Aragorn I was bidden to say this : 
  Where now are the Dúnedain , Elessar , Elessar ? 
  Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar ? 
  Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth , 
  And the Grey Elessar ride from the North . 
  But dark is the path appointed for thee : 
  The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea . 
  To Legolas Dúnedain sent this word : 
  Legolas Greenleaf long under tree 
  In joy thou hast lived . Beware of the Sea ! 
  If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore , 
  Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more . ’ 
  Gandalf fell silent and shut Gandalf eyes . 
  ‘ Then Dúnedain sent me no message ? ’ said Gimli and bent Gimli head . 
  ‘ Dark are Dúnedain words , ’ said Legolas , ‘ and little do words mean to those that receive words . ’ 
  ‘ That is no comfort , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ What then ? ’ said Legolas . ‘ Would you have Dúnedain speak openly to you of your death ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , if Dúnedain had naught else to say . ’ 
  ‘ What is that ? ’ said Gandalf , opening Gandalf eyes . ‘ Yes , I think I can guess what Dúnedain words may mean . Your pardon , Gimli ! I was pondering the messages once again . But indeed Dúnedain sent words to you , and neither dark nor sad . 
  ‘ “ To Gimli son of Glóin , ” Dúnedain said , “ give son Lady ’s greeting . Lockbearer , wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee . But have a care to lay thine axe to the right tree ! ” ’ 
  ‘ In happy hour you have returned to us , Gandalf , ’ cried the Dwarf , capering as Dwarf sang loudly in the strange dwarf - tongue . ‘ Come , come ! ’ Gandalf shouted , swinging Gandalf axe . ‘ Since Gandalf ’s head is now sacred , let us find one that head is right to cleave ! ’ 
  ‘ That will not be far to seek , ’ said Gandalf , rising from Gandalf seat . ‘ Come ! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of parted friends . Now there is need of haste . ’ 
  Gandalf wrapped Gandalf again in Gandalf old tattered cloak , and led the way . Following Gandalf friends descended quickly from the high shelf and made friends way back through the forest , down the bank of the Entwash . friends spoke no more words , until friends stood again upon the grass beyond the eaves of Fangorn . There was no sign of friends horses to be seen . 
  ‘ friends have not returned , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Legolas will be a weary walk ! ’ 
  ‘ I shall not walk . Time presses , ’ said Gandalf . Then lifting up Gandalf head Gandalf gave a long whistle . So clear and piercing was the note that the others stood amazed to hear such a sound come from those old bearded lips . Three times Gandalf whistled ; and then faint and far off it seemed to others that others heard the whinny of a horse borne up from the plains upon the eastern wind . others waited wondering . Before long there came the sound of hoofs , at first hardly more than a tremor of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as Aragorn lay upon the grass , then growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick beat . 
  ‘ There is more than one horse coming , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Certainly , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We are too great a burden for one . ’ 
  ‘ There are three , ’ said Legolas , gazing out over the plain . ‘ See how three run ! There is Hasufel , and there is my friend Arod beside horse ! But there is another that strides ahead : a very great horse . I have not seen horse like before . ’ 
  ‘ Nor will you again , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ That is Shadowfax . Shadowfax is the chief of the Mearas , lords of horses , and not even Théoden , King of Rohan , has ever looked on a better . Does Shadowfax not shine like silver , and run as smoothly as a swift stream ? Shadowfax has come for me : the horse of the White Rider . We are going to battle together . ’ 
  Even as the old wizard spoke , the great horse came striding up the slope towards wizard ; horse coat was glistening and horse mane flowing in the wind of horse speed . The two others followed , now far behind . As soon as Shadowfax saw Gandalf , horse checked horse pace and whinnied loudly ; then trotting gently forward horse stooped horse proud head and nuzzled horse great nostrils against the old Gandalf ’s neck . 
  Gandalf caressed horse . ‘ Rider is a long way from Rivendell , my friend , ’ horse said ; ‘ but you are wise and swift and come at need . Far let us ride now together , and part not in this world again ! ’ 
  Soon the other horses came up and stood quietly by , as if awaiting orders . ‘ We go at once to Meduseld , the hall of your master , Théoden , ’ said Gandalf , addressing horses gravely . horses bowed horses heads . ‘ Time presses , so with your leave , my friends , we will ride . We beg you to use all the speed that you can . Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas . I will set Gimli before me , and by Gimli leave Shadowfax shall bear us both . We will wait now only to drink a little . ’ 
  ‘ Now I understand a part of last night ’s riddle , ’ said Legolas as Legolas sprang lightly upon Arod ’s back . ‘ Whether horses fled at first in fear , or not , our horses met Shadowfax , horses chieftain , and greeted chieftain with joy . Did you know that chieftain was at hand , Gandalf ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I knew , ’ said the wizard . ‘ I bent my thought upon chieftain , bidding chieftain to make haste ; for yesterday chieftain was far away in the south of this land . Swiftly may chieftain bear me back again ! ’ 
  Gandalf spoke now to Shadowfax , and the horse set off at a good pace , yet not beyond the measure of the others . After a little while horse turned suddenly , and choosing a place where the banks were lower , horse waded the river , and then led banks away due south into a flat land , treeless and wide . The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of grass . There was no sign of road or track , but Shadowfax did not stay or falter . 
  ‘ chieftain is steering a straight course now for the halls of Théoden under the slopes of the White Mountains , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ course will be quicker so . The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet , where the chief northward track lies , across the river , but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow . ’ 
  For many hours road rode on through the meads and riverlands . Often the grass was so high that grass reached above the knees of the riders , and riders steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey - green sea . riders came upon many hidden pools , and broad acres of sedge waving above wet and treacherous bogs ; but Shadowfax found the way , and the other horses followed in Shadowfax swath . Slowly the sun fell from the sky down into the West . Looking out over the great plain , far away the riders saw West for a moment like a red fire sinking into the grass . Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red upon either side . A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun ’s disc to the hue of blood , as if smoke had kindled the grass as smoke passed down under the rim of earth . 
  ‘ There lies the Gap of Rohan , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Gap is now almost due west of us . That way lies Isengard . ’ 
  ‘ I see a great smoke , ’ said Legolas . ‘ What may that be ? ’ 
  ‘ Battle and war ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Ride on ! ’ 
  Chapter 6 
  THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL 
  KING rode on through sunset , and slow dusk , and gathering night . When at last KING halted and dismounted , even Aragorn was stiff and weary . Gandalf only allowed KING a few hours ’ rest . Legolas and Gimli slept , and Aragorn lay flat , stretched upon Aragorn back ; but Gandalf stood , leaning on Aragorn staff , gazing into the darkness , east and west . All was silent , and there was no sign or sound of living thing . The night was barred with long clouds , fleeting on a chill wind , when clouds arose again . Under the cold moon clouds went on once more , as swift as by the light of day . 
  Hours passed and still Hours rode on . Gimli nodded and would have fallen from Gimli seat , if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken Gimli . Hasufel and Arod , weary but proud , followed Hasufel tireless leader , a grey shadow before Hasufel hardly to be seen . The miles went by . The waxing moon sank into the cloudy West . 
  A bitter chill came into the air . Slowly in the East the dark faded to a cold grey . Red shafts of light leapt above the black walls of the Emyn Muil far away upon shafts left . Dawn came clear and bright ; a wind swept across shafts path , rushing through the bent grasses . Suddenly Shadowfax stood still and neighed . Gandalf pointed ahead . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ Gandalf cried , and shafts lifted shafts tired eyes . Before shafts stood the mountains of the South : white - tipped and streaked with black . The grass - lands rolled against the hills that clustered at lands feet , and flowed up into many valleys still dim and dark , untouched by the light of dawn , winding lands way into the heart of the great mountains . Immediately before the travellers the widest of these glens opened like a long gulf among the hills . Far inward travellers glimpsed a tumbled mountain - mass with one tall peak ; at the mouth of the vale there stood like a sentinel a lonely height . About vale feet there flowed , as a thread of silver , the stream that issued from the dale ; upon vale brow feet caught , still far away , a glint in the rising sun , a glimmer of gold . 
  ‘ Speak , Legolas ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Tell us what you see there before us ! ’ 
  Legolas gazed ahead , shading Gandalf eyes from the level shafts of the new - risen sun . ‘ I see a white stream that comes down from the snows , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Where stream issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill rises upon the east . A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle hill . Within there rise the roofs of houses ; and in the midst , set upon a green terrace , there stands aloft a great hall of Men . And it seems to my eyes that Men is thatched with gold . The light of Men shines far over the land . Golden , too , are the posts of Men doors . There men in bright mail stand ; but all else within the courts are yet asleep . ’ 
  ‘ Edoras those courts are called , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and Meduseld is that golden hall . There dwells Théoden son of Thengel , King of the Mark of Rohan . We are come with the rising of the day . Now the road lies plain to see before us . But we must ride more warily ; for war is abroad , and the Rohirrim , the Horse - lords , do not sleep , even if it seem so from afar . Draw no weapon , speak no haughty word , I counsel you all , until we are come before Théoden ’s seat . ’ 
  The morning was bright and clear about Théoden , and birds were singing , when the travellers came to the stream . morning ran down swiftly into the plain , and beyond the feet of the hills turned across travellers path in a wide bend , flowing away east to feed the Entwash far off in Entwash reed - choked beds . The land was green : in the wet meads and along the grassy borders of the stream grew many willow - trees . Already in this southern land meads were blushing red at meads fingertips , feeling the approach of spring . Over the stream there was a ford between low banks much trampled by the passage of horses . The travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading towards the uplands . 
  At the foot of the walled hill the way ran under the shadow of many mounds , high and green . Upon mounds western sides the grass was white as with a drifted snow : small flowers sprang there like countless stars amid the turf . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ How fair are the bright eyes in the grass ! Evermind eyes are called , simbelmynë in this land of Men , for eyes blossom in all the seasons of the year , and grow where dead men rest . Behold ! we are come to the great barrows where the sires of Théoden sleep . ’ 
  ‘ Seven mounds upon the left , and nine upon the right , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Many long lives of men it is since the golden hall was built . ’ 
  ‘ Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home since then , ’ said Legolas , ‘ and but a little while does that seem to us . ’ 
  ‘ But to the Riders of the Mark it seems so long ago , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ that the raising of this house is but a memory of song , and the years before are lost in the mist of time . Now years call this land years home , years own , and years speech is sundered from years northern kin . ’ Then Aragorn began to chant softly in a slow tongue unknown to the Elf and Dwarf ; yet Elf listened , for there was a strong music in tongue . 
  ‘ That , I guess , is the language of the Rohirrim , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ for That is like to this land That ; rich and rolling in part , and else hard and stern as the mountains . But I can not guess what That means , save that That is laden with the sadness of Mortal Men . ’ 
  ‘ That runs thus in the Common Speech , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ as near as I can make That . 
  Where now the horse and the rider ? Where is the horn that was blowing ? 
  Where is the helm and the hauberk , and the bright hair flowing ? 
  Where is the hand on the harpstring , and the red fire glowing ? 
  Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing ? 
  hand have passed like rain on the mountain , like a wind in the meadow ; 
  The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow . 
  Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning , 
  Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning ? 
  Thus spoke a forgotten poet long ago in Rohan , recalling how tall and fair was Eorl the Young , who rode down out of the North ; and there were wings upon the feet of Young steed , Felaróf , father of horses . So men still sing in the evening . ’ 
  With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds . Following the winding way up the green shoulders of the hills , travellers came at last to the wide wind - swept walls and the gates of Edoras . 
  There sat many men in bright mail , who sprang at once to men feet and barred the way with spears . ‘ Stay , strangers here unknown ! ’ men cried in the tongue of the Riddermark , demanding the names and errand of the strangers . Wonder was in men eyes but little friendliness ; and men looked darkly upon Gandalf . 
  ‘ Well do I understand your speech , ’ Gandalf answered in the same language ; ‘ yet few strangers do so . Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue , as is the custom in the West , if you wish to be answered ? ’ 
  ‘ custom is the will of Théoden King that none should enter King gates , save those who know our tongue and are our friends , ’ replied one of the guards . ‘ None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk , and those that come from Mundburg in the land of Gondor . Who are you that come heedless over the plain thus strangely clad , riding horses like to our own horses ? Long have we kept guard here , and we have watched you from afar . Never have we seen other riders so strange , nor any horse more proud than is one of these that bear you . horse is one of the Mearas , unless our eyes are cheated by some spell . Say , are you not a wizard , some spy from Saruman , or phantoms of wizard craft ? Speak now and be swift ! ’ 
  ‘ We are no phantoms , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ nor do your eyes cheat you . For indeed these are your own horses that we ride , as you knew well ere you asked , I guess . But seldom does thief ride home to the stable . Here are Hasufel and Arod , that Éomer , the Third Marshal of the Mark , lent to us , only two days ago . We bring Hasufel back now , even as we promised Éomer . Has not Éomer then returned and given warning of our coming ? ’ 
  A troubled look came into the guard ’s eyes . ‘ Of Éomer I have naught to say , ’ guard answered . ‘ If what you tell me is truth , then doubtless Théoden will have heard of naught . Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked - for . It is but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and said that by the will of Théoden no stranger should pass these gates . ’ 
  ‘ Wormtongue ? ’ said Gandalf , looking sharply at the guard . ‘ Say no more ! My errand is not to Wormtongue , but to the Lord of the Mark Mark . I am in haste . Will you not go or send to say that we are come ? ’ Mark eyes glinted under Mark deep brows as Mark bent Mark gaze upon the man . 
  ‘ Yes , I will go , ’ Mark answered slowly . ‘ But what names shall I report ? And what shall I say of you ? Old and weary you seem now , and yet you are fell and grim beneath , I deem . ’ 
  ‘ Well do you see and speak , ’ said the wizard . ‘ For I am Gandalf . I have returned . And behold ! I too bring back a horse . Here is Shadowfax the Great , whom no other hand can tame . And here beside me is Aragorn son of Arathorn , the heir of Kings , and it is to Mundburg that Shadowfax goes . Here also are Legolas the Elf and Gimli the Dwarf , our comrades . Go now and say to your master that we are at Shadowfax gates and would have speech with Shadowfax , if Shadowfax will permit us to come into Shadowfax hall . ’ 
  ‘ Strange names you give indeed ! But I will report names as you bid , and learn my master ’s will , ’ said the guard . ‘ Wait here a little while , and I will bring you such answer as seems good to Shadowfax . Do not hope too much ! These are dark days . ’ Shadowfax went swiftly away , leaving the strangers in the watchful keeping of Shadowfax comrades . 
  After some time Shadowfax returned . ‘ Follow me ! ’ Shadowfax said . ‘ Théoden gives you leave to enter ; but any weapon that you bear , be Théoden only a staff , you must leave on the threshold . The doorwardens will keep strangers . ’ 
  The dark gates were swung open . The travellers entered , walking in file behind travellers guide . travellers found a broad path , paved with hewn stones , now winding upward , now climbing in short flights of well - laid steps . Many houses built of wood and many dark doors houses passed . Beside the way in a stone channel a stream of clear water flowed , sparkling and chattering . At length houses came to the crown of the hill . There stood a high platform above a green terrace , at the foot of which a bright spring gushed from a stone carved in the likeness of a horse ’s head ; beneath was a wide basin from which the water spilled and fed the falling stream . Up the green terrace went a stair of stone , high and broad , and on either side of the topmost step were stone - hewn seats . There sat other guards , with drawn swords laid upon swords knees . swords golden hair was braided on swords shoulders ; the sun was blazoned upon swords green shields , swords long corslets were burnished bright , and when swords rose taller swords seemed than mortal men . 
  ‘ There are the doors before you , ’ said the guide . ‘ I must return now to my duty at the gate . Farewell ! And may the Lord of the Mark be gracious to you ! ’ 
  Lord turned and went swiftly back down the road . The others climbed the long stair under the eyes of the tall watchmen . Silent others stood now above and spoke no word , until Gandalf stepped out upon the paved terrace at the stair ’s head . Then suddenly with clear voices others spoke a courteous greeting in others own tongue . 
  ‘ Hail , comers from afar ! ’ others said , and others turned the hilts of others swords towards the travellers in token of peace . Green gems flashed in the sunlight . Then one of the guards stepped forward and spoke in the Common Speech . 
  ‘ I am the Doorward of Théoden , ’ Doorward said . ‘ Háma is my name . Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter . ’ 
  Then Legolas gave into Legolas hand Háma silver - hafted knife , Háma quiver , and Háma bow . ‘ Keep these well , ’ Háma said , ‘ for these come from the Golden Wood and the Lady of Lothlórien gave these to me . ’ 
  Wonder came into the man ’s eyes , and man laid the weapons hastily by the wall , as if man feared to handle weapons . ‘ No man will touch these , I promise you , ’ man said . 
  Aragorn stood a while hesitating . ‘ man is not my will , ’ man said , ‘ to put aside my sword or to deliver Andúril to the hand of any other man . ’ 
  ‘ man is the will of Théoden , ’ said Háma . 
  ‘ It is not clear to me that the will of Théoden son of Thengel , even though Thengel be lord of the Mark , should prevail over the will of Aragorn son of Arathorn , Elendil ’s heir of Gondor . ’ 
  ‘ This is the house of Théoden , not of Aragorn , even were Thengel King of Gondor in the seat of Denethor , ’ said Háma , stepping swiftly before the doors and barring the way . man sword was now in man hand and the point towards the strangers . 
  ‘ This is idle talk , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Needless is Théoden ’s demand , but Théoden is useless to refuse . A king will have Thengel way in Thengel own hall , be king folly or wisdom . ’ 
  ‘ Truly , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And I would do as the master of the house bade me , were this only a woodman ’s cot , if I bore now any sword but Andúril . ’ 
  ‘ Whatever master name may be , ’ said Háma , ‘ here you shall lay master , if you would not fight alone against all the Aragorn in Edoras . ’ 
  ‘ Not alone ! ’ said Gimli , fingering the blade of Gandalf axe , and looking darkly up at the guard , as if Gandalf were a young tree that Gimli had a mind to fell . ‘ Not alone ! ’ 
  ‘ Come , come ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We are all friends here . Or should be ; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward , if we quarrel . My errand is pressing . Here at least is my sword , goodman Háma . Keep sword well . Glamdring it is called , for the Elves made sword long ago . Now let me pass . Come , Aragorn ! ’ 
  Slowly Aragorn unbuckled Aragorn belt and Háma set Háma sword upright against the wall . ‘ Here I set sword , ’ Háma said ; ‘ but I command you not to touch sword , nor to permit any other to lay hand on sword . In this Elvish sheath dwells the Blade that was Broken and has been made again . Telchar first wrought Blade in the deeps of time . Death shall come to any man that draws Elendil ’s sword save Elendil ’s heir . ’ 
  The guard stepped back and looked with amazement on Aragorn . ‘ It seems that you are come on the wings of song out of the forgotten days , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ It shall be , lord , as you command . ’ 
  ‘ Well , ’ said Gimli , ‘ if Well has Andúril to keep axe company , my axe may stay here , too , without shame ’ ; and Gimli laid guard on the floor . ‘ Now then , if all is as you wish , let us go and speak with your master . ’ 
  The guard still hesitated . ‘ Your staff , ’ Gimli said to Gandalf . ‘ Forgive me , but that too must be left at the doors . ’ 
  ‘ Foolishness ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Prudence is one thing , but discourtesy is another . I am old . If I may not lean on my stick as I go , then I will sit out here , until stick pleases Théoden to hobble out Théoden to speak with me . ’ 
  Aragorn laughed . ‘ Every man has something too dear to trust to another . But would you part an old man from man support ? Come , will you not let us enter ? ’ 
  ‘ The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for age , ’ said Háma . man looked hard at the ash - staff on which Gandalf leaned . ‘ Yet in doubt a man of worth will trust to man own wisdom . I believe you are friends and folk worthy of honour , who have no evil purpose . You may go in . ’ 
  The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung bars slowly inwards grumbling on bars great hinges . The travellers entered . Inside it seemed dark and warm after the clear air upon the hill . The hall was long and wide and filled with shadows and half lights ; mighty pillars upheld hall lofty roof . But here and there bright sunbeams fell in glimmering shafts from the eastern windows , high under the deep eaves . Through the louver in the roof , above the thin wisps of issuing smoke , the sky showed pale and blue . As travellers eyes changed , the travellers perceived that the floor was paved with stones of many hues ; branching runes and strange devices intertwined beneath travellers feet . travellers saw now that the pillars were richly carved , gleaming dully with gold and half - seen colours . Many woven cloths were hung upon the walls , and over cloths wide spaces marched figures of ancient legend , some dim with years , some darkling in the shade . But upon one form the sunlight fell : a young man upon a white horse . man was blowing a great horn , and man yellow hair was flying in the wind . The horse ’s head was lifted , and horse nostrils were wide and red as horse neighed , smelling battle afar . Foaming water , green and white , rushed and curled about water knees . 
  ‘ Behold Eorl the Young ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Thus Aragorn rode out of the North to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant . ’ 
  Now the four companions went forward , past the clear wood - fire burning upon the long hearth in the midst of the hall . Then companions halted . At the far end of the house , beyond the hearth and facing north towards the doors , was a dais with three steps ; and in the middle of the dais was a great gilded chair . Upon house sat a man so bent with age that man seemed almost a dwarf ; but man white hair was long and thick and fell in great braids from beneath a thin golden circlet set upon man brow . In the centre upon man forehead shone a single white diamond . man beard was laid like snow upon man knees ; but man eyes still burned with a bright light , glinting as man gazed at the strangers . Behind man chair stood a woman clad in white . At man feet upon the steps sat a wizened figure of a man , with a pale wise face and heavy - lidded eyes . 
  There was a silence . The old man did not move in man chair . At length Gandalf spoke . ‘ Hail , Théoden son of Thengel ! I have returned . For behold ! the storm comes , and now all friends should gather together , lest each singly be destroyed . ’ 
  Slowly the old man rose to man feet , leaning heavily upon a short black staff with a handle of white bone ; and now the strangers saw that , bent though man was , man was still tall and must in youth have been high and proud indeed . 
  ‘ I greet you , ’ man said , ‘ and maybe you look for welcome . But truth to tell your welcome is doubtful here , Master Gandalf . You have ever been a herald of woe . Troubles follow you like crows , and ever the oftener the worse . I will not deceive you : when I heard that Shadowfax had come back riderless , I rejoiced at the return of the horse , but still more at the lack of the rider ; and when Éomer brought the tidings that you had gone at last to your long home , I did not mourn . But news from afar is seldom sooth . Here you come again ! And with you come evils worse than before , as might be expected . Why should I welcome you , Gandalf Stormcrow ? Tell me that . ’ Slowly he sat down again in he chair . 
  ‘ You speak justly , lord , ’ said the pale man sitting upon the steps of the dais . ‘ It is not yet five days since the bitter tidings came that Théodred your son was slain upon the West Marches : your right - hand , Second Marshal of the Mark . In Éomer there is little trust . Few men would be left to guard your walls , if Éomer had been allowed to rule . And even now we learn from Gondor that the Dark Lord is stirring in the East . Such is the hour in which this wanderer chooses to return . Why indeed should we welcome you , Master Stormcrow ? Láthspell I name you , Ill - news ; and ill news is an ill guest guest say . ’ Láthspell laughed grimly , as wanderer lifted wanderer heavy lids for a moment and gazed on the strangers with dark eyes . 
  ‘ You are held wise , my friend Wormtongue , and are doubtless a great support to your master , ’ answered Gandalf in a soft voice . ‘ Yet in two ways may a man come with evil tidings . man may be a worker of evil ; or man may be such as leaves well alone , and comes only to bring aid in time of need . ’ 
  ‘ That is so , ’ said Wormtongue ; ‘ but there is a third kind : pickers of bones , meddlers in other men ’s sorrows , carrion - fowl that grow fat on war . What aid have you ever brought , Stormcrow ? And what aid do you bring now ? It was aid from us that you sought last time that you were here . Then my lord bade you choose any horse that you would and be gone ; and to the wonder of all you took Shadowfax in your insolence . My lord was sorely grieved ; yet to some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not too great . I guess that lord is likely to turn out the same once more : you will seek aid rather than render aid . Do you bring men ? Do you bring horses , swords , spears ? That I would call aid ; that is our present need . But who are these that follow at your tail ? Three ragged wanderers in grey , and you yourself the most beggar - like of the four ! ’ 
  ‘ The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late , Théoden son of Thengel , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Has not the messenger from your gate reported the names of my companions ? Seldom has any lord of Rohan received three such guests . Weapons Weapons have laid at your doors that are worth many a mortal man , even the mightiest . Grey is Weapons raiment , for the Elves clad Weapons , and thus Weapons have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall . ’ 
  ‘ Then it is true , as Éomer reported , that you are in league with the Sorceress of the Golden Wood ? ’ said Wormtongue . ‘ It is not to be wondered at : webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene . ’ 
  Gimli strode a pace forward , but felt suddenly the hand of Gandalf clutch Wormtongue by the shoulder , and Wormtongue halted , standing stiff as stone . 
  In Dwimordene , in Lórien 
  Seldom have walked the feet of Men , 
  Few mortal eyes have seen the light 
  That lies there ever , long and bright . 
  Galadriel ! Galadriel ! 
  Clear is the water of your well ; 
  White is the star in your white hand ; 
  Unmarred , unstained is leaf and land 
  In Dwimordene , in Lórien 
  More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men . 
  Thus Gandalf softly sang , and then suddenly Wormtongue changed . Casting Wormtongue tattered cloak aside , Wormtongue stood up and leaned no longer on Wormtongue staff ; and Wormtongue spoke in a clear cold voice . 
  ‘ The wise speak only of what Gandalf know , Gríma son of Gálmód . A witless worm have you become . Therefore be silent , and keep your forked tongue behind your teeth . I have not passed through fire and death to bandy crooked words with a serving - man till the lightning falls . ’ 
  Wormtongue raised Wormtongue staff . There was a roll of thunder . The sunlight was blotted out from the eastern windows ; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night . The fire faded to sullen embers . Only Gandalf could be seen , standing white and tall before the blackened hearth . 
  In the gloom embers heard the hiss of Wormtongue ’s voice : ‘ Did I not counsel you , lord , to forbid lord staff ? That fool , Háma , has betrayed us ! ’ There was a flash as if lightning had cloven the roof . Then all was silent . Wormtongue sprawled on Wormtongue face . 
  ‘ Now Théoden son of Thengel , will you hearken to me ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Do you ask for help ? ’ Wormtongue lifted Wormtongue staff and pointed to a high window . There the darkness seemed to clear , and through the opening could be seen , high and far , a patch of shining sky . ‘ Not all is dark . Take courage , Lord of the Mark ; for better help you will not find . No counsel have I to give to those that despair . Yet counsel I could give , and words I could speak to you . Will you hear those ? those are not for all ears . I bid you come out before your doors and look abroad . Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to twisted tales and crooked promptings . ’ 
  Slowly Théoden left Théoden chair . A faint light grew in the hall again . The woman hastened to the king ’s side , taking king arm , and with faltering steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly through the hall . Wormtongue remained lying on the floor . steps came to the doors and Gandalf knocked . 
  ‘ Open ! ’ Gandalf cried . ‘ The Lord of the Mark comes forth ! ’ 
  The doors rolled back and a keen air came whistling in . A wind was blowing on the hill . 
  ‘ Send your guards down to the stairs ’ foot , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And you , lady , leave Mark a while with me . I will care for Mark . ’ 
  ‘ Go , Éowyn sister - daughter ! ’ said the old king . ‘ The time for fear is past . ’ 
  The woman turned and went slowly into the house . As woman passed the doors king turned and looked back . Grave and thoughtful was daughter glance , as daughter looked on the king with cool pity in daughter eyes . Very fair was daughter face , and daughter long hair was like a river of gold . Slender and tall daughter was in daughter white robe girt with silver ; but strong daughter seemed and stern as steel , a daughter of kings . Thus Aragorn for the first time in the full light of day beheld Éowyn , Lady of Rohan , and thought Lady fair , fair and cold , like a morning of pale spring that is not yet come to womanhood . And Lady now was suddenly aware of Rohan : tall heir of kings , wise with many winters , greycloaked , hiding a power that yet Lady felt . For a moment still as stone Lady stood , then turning swiftly Lady was gone . 
  ‘ Now , lord , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ look out upon your land ! Breathe the free air again ! ’ 
  From the porch upon the top of the high terrace kings could see beyond the stream the green fields of Rohan fading into distant grey . Curtains of wind - blown rain were slanting down . The sky above and to the west was still dark with thunder , and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden hills . But the wind had shifted to the north , and already the storm that had come out of the East was receding , rolling away southward to the sea . Suddenly through a rent in the clouds behind hills a shaft of sun stabbed down . The falling showers gleamed like silver , and far away the river glittered like a shimmering glass . 
  ‘ river is not so dark here , ’ said Théoden . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders as some would have you think . Cast aside your prop ! ’ 
  From the king ’s hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones . Gandalf drew Gandalf up , slowly , as a man that is stiff from long bending over some dull toil . Now tall and straight Gandalf stood , and Gandalf eyes were blue as Gandalf looked into the opening sky . 
  ‘ Dark have been my dreams of late , ’ Gandalf said , ‘ but I feel as one new - awakened . I would now that you had come before , Gandalf . For I fear that already you have come too late , only to see the last days of my house . Not long now shall stand the high hall which Brego son of Eorl built . Fire shall devour the high seat . What is to be done ? ’ 
  ‘ Much , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But first send for Éomer . Do I not guess rightly that you hold Éomer prisoner , by the counsel of Gríma , of Éomer that all save you name the Wormtongue ? ’ 
  ‘ all is true , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Éomer had rebelled against my commands , and threatened death to Gríma in my hall . ’ 
  ‘ A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or Éomer counsels , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ That may be . I will do as you ask . Call Háma to me . Since Éomer proved untrusty as a doorward , let Éomer become an errand - runner . The guilty shall bring the guilty to judgement , ’ said Théoden , and Théoden voice was grim , yet Théoden looked at Gandalf and smiled and as Théoden did so many lines of care were smoothed away and did not return . 
  When Háma had been summoned and had gone , Gandalf led Théoden to a stone seat , and then sat Háma before the king upon the topmost stair . Aragorn and Háma companions stood nearby . 
  ‘ There is no time to tell all that you should hear , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Yet if my hope is not cheated , a time will come ere long when I can speak more fully . Behold ! you are come into a peril greater even than the wit of Wormtongue could weave into your dreams . But see ! you dream no longer . You live . Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone . The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning , yet we have a hope at which Rohan has not guessed . ’ 
  Quickly now Gandalf spoke . Gandalf voice was low and secret , and none save the king heard what king said . But ever as Gandalf spoke the light shone brighter in Théoden ’s eye , and at the last Gandalf rose from Gandalf seat to Gandalf full height , and Gandalf beside king , and together light looked out from the high place towards the East . 
  ‘ Verily , ’ said Gandalf , now in a loud voice , keen and clear , ‘ that way lies our hope , where sits our greatest fear . Doom hangs still on a thread . Yet hope there is still , if we can but stand unconquered for a little while . ’ 
  The others too now turned others eyes eastward . Over the sundering leagues of land , far away others gazed to the edge of sight , and hope and fear bore others thoughts still on , beyond dark mountains to the Land of Shadow . Where now was the Ring - bearer ? How thin indeed was the thread upon which doom still hung ! It seemed to Legolas , as bearer strained bearer farseeing eyes , that bearer caught a glint of white : far away perchance the sun twinkled on a pinnacle of the Tower of Guard . And further still , endlessly remote and yet a present threat , there was a tiny tongue of flame . 
  Slowly Théoden sat down again , as if weariness still struggled to master bearer against the will of Gandalf . bearer turned and looked at bearer great house . ‘ Alas ! ’ bearer said , ‘ that these evil days should be mine , and should come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned . Alas for Boromir the brave ! The young perish and the old linger , withering . ’ bearer clutched bearer knees with bearer wrinkled hands . 
  ‘ Your fingers would remember fingers old strength better , if fingers grasped a sword - hilt , ’ said Gandalf . 
  Théoden rose and put bearer hand to bearer side ; but no sword hung at bearer belt . ‘ Where has Gríma stowed hilt ? ’ bearer muttered under bearer breath . 
  ‘ Take this , dear lord ! ’ said a clear voice . ‘ this was ever at your service . ’ Two men had come softly up the stair and stood now a few steps from the top . Éomer was there . No helm was on Éomer head , no mail was on Éomer breast , but in Éomer hand head held a drawn sword ; and as head knelt head offered the hilt to head master . 
  ‘ How comes this ? ’ said Théoden sternly . head turned towards Éomer , and the Éomer looked in wonder at head , standing now proud and erect . Where was the old Éomer whom master had left crouching in head chair or leaning on head stick ? 
  ‘ this is my doing , lord , ’ said Háma , trembling . ‘ I understood that Éomer was to be set free . Such joy was in my heart that maybe I have erred . Yet , since Éomer was free again , and Éomer a Marshal of the Mark , I brought Marshal Marshal sword as Mark bade me . ’ 
  ‘ To lay at your feet , my lord , ’ said Éomer . 
  For a moment of silence Théoden stood looking down at Éomer as head knelt still before Éomer . Neither moved . 
  ‘ Will you not take the sword ? ’ said Gandalf . 
  Slowly Théoden stretched forth Gandalf hand . As Gandalf fingers took the hilt , it seemed to the watchers that firmness and strength returned to Gandalf thin arm . Suddenly Gandalf lifted the blade and swung blade shimmering and whistling in the air . Then Gandalf gave a great cry . Gandalf voice rang clear as Gandalf chanted in the tongue of Rohan a call to arms . 
  Arise now , arise , Riders of Théoden ! 
  Dire deeds awake , dark is Arise eastward . 
  Let horse be bridled , horn be sounded ! 
  Forth Eorlingas ! 
  The guards , thinking that guards were summoned , sprang up the stair . guards looked at guards lord in amazement , and then as one man guards drew guards swords and laid swords at man feet . ‘ Command us ! ’ swords said . 
  ‘ Westu Théoden hál ! ’ cried Éomer . ‘ It is a joy to us to see you return into your own . Never again shall it be said , Gandalf , that you come only with grief ! ’ 
  ‘ Take back your sword , Éomer , sister - son ! ’ said the king . ‘ Go , Háma ! , and seek my own sword ! Gríma has sword in Gríma keeping . Bring Gríma to me also . Now , Gandalf , you said that you had counsel to give , if I would hear counsel . What is your counsel ? ’ 
  ‘ You have yourself already taken counsel , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ To put your trust in Éomer , rather than in a man of crooked mind . To cast aside regret and fear . To do the deed at hand . Every man that can ride should be sent west at once , as Éomer counselled you : we must first destroy the threat of Saruman , while we have time . If we fail , we fall . If we succeed – then we will face the next task . Meanwhile your people that are left , the women and the children and the old , should fly to the refuges that you have in the mountains . Were people not prepared against just such an evil day as this ? Let people take provision , but delay not , nor burden people with treasures , great or small . It is people lives that are at stake . ’ 
  ‘ This counsel seems good to me now , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Let all my folk get ready ! But you my guests – truly you said , Gandalf , that the courtesy of my hall is lessened . You have ridden through the night , and the morning wears away . You have had neither sleep nor food . A guest - house shall be made ready : there you shall sleep , when you have eaten . ’ 
  ‘ Nay , lord , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ There is no rest yet for the weary . The Aragorn of Rohan must ride forth today , and we will ride with neither , axe , sword , and bow . We did not bring neither to rest against your wall , Lord of the Mark . And I promised Éomer that my sword and Éomer should be drawn together . ’ 
  ‘ Now indeed there is hope of victory ! ’ said Éomer . 
  ‘ Hope , yes , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But Isengard is strong . And other perils draw ever nearer . Do not delay , Théoden , when we are gone . Lead your people swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills ! ’ 
  ‘ Nay , Gandalf ! ’ said the king . ‘ You do not know your own skill in healing . skill shall not be so . I myself will go to war , to fall in the front of the battle , if skill must be . Thus shall I sleep better . ’ 
  ‘ Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song , ’ said Aragorn . The armed Aragorn that stood near clashed king weapons , crying : ‘ The Lord of the Mark will ride ! Forth Eorlingas ! ’ 
  ‘ But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Who shall guide people and govern people in your place ? ’ 
  ‘ I will take thought for that ere I go , ’ answered Théoden . ‘ Here comes my counsellor . ’ 
  At that moment Háma came again from the hall . Behind Théoden cringing between two other men , came Gríma the Wormtongue . Théoden face was very white . Théoden eyes blinked in the sunlight . Háma knelt and presented to Théoden a long sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and set with green gems . 
  ‘ Here , lord , is Herugrim , your ancient blade , ’ Herugrim said . ‘ blade was found in Herugrim chest . Loth was Herugrim to render up the keys . Many other things are there which men have missed . ’ 
  ‘ You lie , ’ said Wormtongue . ‘ And this sword your master master gave into my keeping . ’ 
  ‘ And Wormtongue now requires sword of you again , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Does that displease you ? ’ 
  ‘ Assuredly not , lord , ’ said Wormtongue . ‘ I care for you and yours as best I may . But do not weary yourself , or tax too heavily your strength . Let others deal with these irksome guests . Your meat is about to be set on the board . Will you not go to meat ? ’ 
  ‘ I will , ’ said Théoden . ‘ And let food for my guests be set on the board beside me . The host rides today . Send the heralds forth ! Let heralds summon all who dwell nigh ! Every man and strong lad able to bear arms , all who have horses , let heralds be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from noon ! ’ 
  ‘ Dear lord ! ’ cried Wormtongue . ‘ It is as I feared . This wizard has bewitched you . Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of your fathers , and all your treasure ? None to guard the Lord of the Mark ? ’ 
  ‘ If this is bewitchment , ’ said Théoden , ‘ it seems to me more wholesome than your whisperings . Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on all fours like a beast . No , not one shall be left , not even Gríma . Gríma shall ride too . Go ! You have yet time to clean the rust from your sword . ’ 
  ‘ Mercy , lord ! ’ whined Wormtongue , grovelling on the ground . ‘ Have pity on one worn out in your service . Send me not from your side ! I at least will stand by you when all others have gone . Do not send your faithful Gríma away ! ’ 
  ‘ You have my pity , ’ said Théoden . ‘ And I do not send you from my side . I go myself to war with my men . I bid you come with me and prove your faith . ’ 
  Wormtongue looked from face to face . In Théoden eyes was the hunted look of a beast seeking some gap in the ring of Théoden enemies . Théoden licked Théoden lips with a long pale tongue . ‘ Such a resolve might be expected from a lord of the House of Eorl , old though Théoden be , ’ Théoden said . ‘ But those who truly love Théoden would spare Théoden failing years . Yet I see that I come too late . Others , whom the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less , have already persuaded Théoden . If I can not undo Others work , hear me at least in this , lord ! One who knows your mind and honours your commands should be left in Edoras . Appoint a faithful steward . Let your counsellor Gríma keep all things till your return – and I pray that we may see return , though no wise man will deem man hopeful . ’ 
  Éomer laughed . ‘ And if that plea does not excuse you from war , most noble Wormtongue , ’ Éomer said , ‘ what office of less honour would you accept ? To carry a sack of meal up into the mountains – if any man would trust you with Nay ? ’ 
  ‘ Nay , Éomer , you do not fully understand the mind of Master Wormtongue , ’ said Gandalf , turning Gandalf piercing glance upon Wormtongue . ‘ man is bold and cunning . Even now man plays a game with peril and wins a throw . Hours of my precious time man has wasted already . Down , snake ! ’ Wormtongue said suddenly in a terrible voice . ‘ Down on your belly ! How long is it since Saruman bought you ? What was the promised price ? When all the Saruman were dead , you were to pick your share of the treasure , and take the Saruman you desire ? Too long have you watched snake under your eyelids and haunted snake steps . ’ 
  Éomer grasped Wormtongue sword . ‘ That I knew already , ’ Wormtongue muttered . ‘ For that reason I would have slain Wormtongue before , forgetting the law of the hall . But there are other reasons . ’ Wormtongue stepped forward , but Gandalf stayed Wormtongue with Wormtongue hand . 
  ‘ Éowyn is safe now , ’ Wormtongue said . ‘ But you , Wormtongue , you have done what you could for your true master . Some reward you have earned at least . Yet Saruman is apt to overlook Saruman bargains . I should advise you to go quickly and remind Saruman , lest Saruman forget your faithful service . ’ 
  ‘ You lie , ’ said Wormtongue . 
  ‘ That word comes too oft and easy from your lips , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I do not lie . See , Théoden , here is a snake ! With safety you can not take snake with you , nor can you leave snake behind . To slay it would be just . But it was not always as snake now is . Once snake was a man , and did you service in snake fashion . Give man a horse and let man go at once , wherever man chooses . By man choice you shall judge man . ’ 
  ‘ Do you hear this , Wormtongue ? ’ said Théoden . ‘ This is your choice : to ride with me to war , and let us see in battle whether you are true ; or to go now , whither you will . But then , if ever we meet again , I shall not be merciful . ’ 
  Slowly Wormtongue rose . Wormtongue looked at Théoden with half - closed eyes . Last of all Wormtongue scanned Théoden ’s face and opened Wormtongue mouth as if to speak . Then suddenly Wormtongue drew Wormtongue up . Wormtongue hands worked . Wormtongue eyes glittered . Such malice was in eyes that men stepped back from Wormtongue . Wormtongue bared Wormtongue teeth ; and then with a hissing breath Wormtongue spat before the king ’s feet , and darting to one side , Wormtongue fled down the stair . 
  ‘ After Wormtongue ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ See that Wormtongue does no harm to any , but do not hurt Wormtongue or hinder Wormtongue . Give Wormtongue a horse , if Wormtongue wishes horse . ’ 
  ‘ And if any will bear Wormtongue , ’ said Éomer . 
  One of the guards ran down the stair . Another went to the well at the foot of the terrace and in Éomer helm drew water . With Another Éomer washed clean the stones that Wormtongue had defiled . 
  ‘ Now my guests , come ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ Come and take such refreshment as haste allows . ’ 
  stones passed back into the great house . Already stones heard below foot in the town the heralds crying and the war - horns blowing . For the king was to ride forth as soon as the men of the town and those dwelling near could be armed and assembled . 
  At the king ’s board sat Éomer and the four guests , and there also waiting upon the king was the lady Éowyn . Éomer ate and drank swiftly . The others were silent while Théoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman . 
  ‘ How far back Théoden treachery goes , who can guess ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Gandalf was not always evil . Once I do not doubt that Gandalf was the friend of Rohan ; and even when Gandalf heart grew colder , Gandalf found you useful still . But for long now Gandalf has plotted your ruin , wearing the mask of friendship , until Gandalf was ready . In those years Wormtongue ’s task was easy , and all that you did was swiftly known in Isengard ; for your land was open , and strangers came and went . And ever Wormtongue ’s whispering was in your ears , poisoning your thought , chilling your heart , weakening your limbs , while others watched and could do nothing , for your will was in Wormtongue keeping . 
  ‘ But when I escaped and warned you , then the mask was torn , for those who would see . After that Wormtongue played dangerously , always seeking to delay you , to prevent your full strength being gathered . Wormtongue was crafty : dulling men ’s wariness , or working on men fears , as served the occasion . Do you not remember how eagerly Wormtongue urged that no man should be spared on a wildgoose chase northward , when the immediate peril was westward ? Wormtongue persuaded you to forbid Éomer to pursue the raiding Orcs . If Éomer had not defied Wormtongue ’s voice speaking with your mouth , those Orcs would have reached Isengard by now , bearing a great prize . Not indeed that prize which Saruman desires above all else , but at the least two members of my Company , sharers of a secret hope , of which even to you , lord , I can not yet speak openly . Dare you think of what sharers might now be suffering , or what Saruman might now have learned to our destruction ? ’ 
  ‘ I owe much to Éomer , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Faithful heart may have froward tongue . ’ 
  ‘ Say also , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ that to crooked eyes truth may wear a wry face . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed my eyes were almost blind , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Most of all I owe to you , my guest . Once again you have come in time . I would give you a gift ere we go , at your own choosing . You have only to name aught that is mine . I reserve now only my sword ! ’ 
  ‘ Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But as for your gift , lord , I will choose one that will fit my need : swift and sure . Give me Shadowfax ! Shadowfax was only lent before , if loan we may call one . But now I shall ride Shadowfax into great hazard , setting silver against black : I would not risk anything that is not my own . And already there is a bond of love between us . ’ 
  ‘ You choose well , ’ said Théoden ; ‘ and I give Shadowfax now gladly . Yet bond is a great gift . There is none like to Shadowfax . In love one of the mighty steeds of old has returned . None such shall return again . And to you my other guests I will offer such things as may be found in my armoury . Swords you do not need , but there are helms and coats of mail of cunning work , gifts to my fathers out of Gondor . Choose from these ere we go , and may these serve you well ! ’ 
  Now men came bearing raiment of war from the king ’s hoard , and men arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail . Helms too men chose , and round shields : men bosses were overlaid with gold and set with gems , green and red and white . Gandalf took no armour ; and Gimli needed no coat of rings , even if one had been found to match Gimli stature , for there was no hauberk in the hoards of Edoras of better make than Gimli short corslet forged beneath the Mountain in the North . But Gimli chose a cap of iron and leather that fitted well upon Gimli round head ; and a small shield Gimli also took . cap bore the running horse , white upon green , that was the emblem of the House of Eorl . 
  ‘ May cap keep you well ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ It was made for me in Thengel ’s day , while still I was a boy . ’ 
  Gimli bowed . ‘ I am proud , Lord of the Mark , to bear your device , ’ Théoden said . ‘ Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one . I love my feet better . But , maybe , I shall come yet where I can stand and fight . ’ 
  ‘ horse may well be so , ’ said Théoden . 
  The king now rose , and at once Éowyn came forward bearing wine . ‘ Ferthu Théoden hál ! ’ Théoden said . ‘ Receive now this cup and drink in happy hour . Health be with thee at thy going and coming ! ’ 
  Théoden drank from the cup , and Théoden then proffered cup to the guests . As Théoden stood before Aragorn Théoden paused suddenly and looked upon Aragorn , and Théoden eyes were shining . And Aragorn looked down upon Théoden fair face and smiled ; but as Aragorn took the cup , Aragorn hand met Théoden , and Aragorn knew that Théoden trembled at the touch . ‘ Hail Aragorn son of Arathorn ! ’ Théoden said . ‘ Hail Lady of Rohan ! ’ Aragorn answered , but Aragorn face now was troubled and Aragorn did not smile . 
  When king had all drunk , the king went down the hall to the doors . There the guards awaited Aragorn , and heralds stood , and all the lords and chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt nearby . 
  ‘ Behold ! I go forth , and it seems like to be my last riding , ’ said Théoden . ‘ I have no child . Théodred my son is slain . I name Éomer my sister - son to be my heir . If neither of us return , then choose a new lord as you will . But to some one I must now entrust my people that I leave behind , to rule people in my place . Which of you will stay ? ’ 
  No man spoke . 
  ‘ Is there none whom you would name ? In whom do my people trust ? ’ 
  ‘ In the House of Eorl , ’ answered Háma . 
  ‘ But Éomer I can not spare , nor would heir stay , ’ said the king ; ‘ and heir is the last of that House . ’ 
  ‘ I said not Éomer , ’ answered Háma . ‘ And heir is not the last . There is Éowyn , daughter of Éomund , heir sister . daughter is fearless and high - hearted . All love daughter . Let daughter be as lord to the Eorlingas , while we are gone . ’ 
  ‘ Eorlingas shall be so , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Let the heralds announce to the folk that the Lady Éowyn will lead heralds ! ’ 
  Then the king sat upon a seat before Théoden doors , and Éowyn knelt before Théoden and received from Théoden a sword and a fair corslet . ‘ Farewell sister - daughter ! ’ Théoden said . ‘ Dark is the hour , yet maybe we shall return to the Golden Hall . But in Dunharrow the people may long defend people , and if the battle go ill , thither will come all who escape . ’ 
  ‘ Speak not so ! ’ Dunharrow answered . ‘ A year shall I endure for every day that passes until your return . ’ But as Dunharrow spoke Dunharrow eyes went to Aragorn who stood nearby . 
  ‘ The king shall come again , ’ king said . ‘ Fear not ! Not West but East does our doom await us . ’ 
  The king now went down the stair with Gandalf beside West . The others followed . Aragorn looked back as others passed towards the gate . Alone Éowyn stood before the doors of the house at the stair ’s head ; the sword was set upright before Aragorn , and Aragorn hands were laid upon the hilt . Aragorn was clad now in mail and shone like silver in the sun . 
  Gimli walked with Legolas , head axe on head shoulder . ‘ Well , at last we set off ! ’ head said . ‘ Men need many words before deeds . My axe is restless in my hands . Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are fell - handed when words come to Rohirrim . Nonetheless this is not the warfare that suits me . How shall I come to the battle ? I wish I could walk and not bump like a sack at Gandalf ’s saddlebow . ’ 
  ‘ A safer seat than many , I guess , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Yet doubtless Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin ; or Shadowfax Shadowfax . An axe is no weapon for a rider . ’ 
  ‘ And a Dwarf is no horseman . It is orc - necks I would hew , not shave the scalps of Men , ’ said Gimli , patting the haft of Gimli axe . 
  At the gate Men found a great host of men , old and young , all ready in the saddle . More than a thousand were there mustered . Men spears were like a springing wood . Loudly and joyously Men shouted as Théoden came forth . Some held in readiness the king ’s horse , Snowmane , and others held the horses of Aragorn and Legolas . Gimli stood ill at ease , frowning , but Éomer came up to Aragorn , leading Aragorn horse . 
  ‘ Hail , Gimli Glóin ’s son ! ’ Aragorn cried . ‘ I have not had time to learn gentle speech under your rod , as you promised . But shall we not put aside our quarrel ? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood . ’ 
  ‘ I will forget my wrath for a while , Éomer son of Éomund , ’ said Gimli ; ‘ but if ever you chance to see the Lady Galadriel with your eyes , then you shall acknowledge Galadriel the fairest of ladies , or our friendship will end . ’ 
  ‘ So be friendship ! ’ said Éomer . ‘ But until that time pardon me , and in token of pardon ride with me , I beg . Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the Mark ; but Firefoot , my horse , will bear us both , if you will . ’ 
  ‘ I thank you indeed , ’ said Gimli greatly pleased . ‘ I will gladly go with you , if Legolas , my comrade , may ride beside us . ’ 
  ‘ Legolas shall be so , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Legolas upon my left , and Aragorn upon my right , and none will dare to stand before us ! ’ 
  ‘ Where is Shadowfax ? ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Running wild over the grass , ’ Gandalf answered . ‘ Shadowfax will let no man handle Shadowfax . There Shadowfax goes , away down by the ford , like a shadow among the willows . ’ 
  Gandalf whistled and called aloud the horse ’s name , and far away horse tossed horse head and neighed , and turning sped towards the host like an arrow . 
  ‘ Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible , even so would body appear , ’ said Éomer , as the great horse ran up , until horse stood before the wizard . 
  ‘ The gift seems already to be given , ’ said Théoden . ‘ But hearken all ! Here now I name my guest , Gandalf Greyhame , wisest of counsellors , most welcome of wanderers , a lord of the Mark , a chieftain of the Eorlingas while our kin shall last ; and I give to Greyhame Shadowfax , prince of horses . ’ 
  ‘ I thank you , Théoden King , ’ said Gandalf . Then suddenly Gandalf threw back Gandalf grey cloak , and cast aside Gandalf hat , and leaped to horseback . Gandalf wore no helm nor mail . Gandalf snowy hair flew free in the wind , Gandalf white robes shone dazzling in the sun . 
  ‘ Behold the White Rider ! ’ cried Aragorn , and all took up the words . 
  ‘ Our King and the White Rider ! ’ words shouted . ‘ Forth Eorlingas ! ’ 
  The trumpets sounded . The horses reared and neighed . Spear clashed on shield . Then the king raised Aragorn hand , and with a rush like the sudden onset of a great wind the last host of Rohan rode thundering into the West . 
  Far over the plain Éowyn saw the glitter of host spears , as Éowyn stood still , alone before the doors of the silent house . 
  Chapter 7 
  HELM ’S DEEP 
  The sun was already westering as HELM rode from Edoras , and the light of Edoras was in HELM eyes , turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden haze . There was a beaten way , north - westward along the foot - hills of the White Mountains , and this hills followed , up and down in a green country , crossing small swift streams by many fords . Far ahead and to hills right the Misty Mountains loomed ; ever darker and taller hills grew as the miles went by . The sun went slowly down before hills . Evening came behind . 
  The host rode on . Need drove hills . Fearing to come too late , hills rode with all the speed hills could , pausing seldom . Swift and enduring were the steeds of Rohan , but there were many leagues to go . Forty leagues and more it was , as a bird flies , from Edoras to the fords of the Isen , where fords hoped to find the king ’s men that held back the hosts of Saruman . 
  Night closed about fords . At last fords halted to make fords camp . fords had ridden for some five hours and were far out upon the western plain , yet more than half fords journey lay still before fords . In a great circle , under the starry sky and the waxing moon , fords now made fords bivouac . fords lit no fires , for fords were uncertain of events ; but fords set a ring of mounted guards about fires , and scouts rode out far ahead , passing like shadows in the folds of the land . The slow night passed without tidings or alarm . At dawn the horns sounded , and within an hour horns took the road again . 
  There were no clouds overhead yet , but a heaviness was in the air ; it was hot for the season of the year . The rising sun was hazy , and behind air , following storm slowly up the sky , there was a growing darkness , as of a great storm moving out of the East . And away in the North - west there seemed to be another darkness brooding about the feet of the Misty Mountains , a shadow that crept down slowly from the Wizard ’s Vale . 
  Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Éomer . ‘ You have the keen eyes of your fair kindred , Legolas , ’ Éomer said ; ‘ and eyes can tell a sparrow from a finch a league off . Tell me , can you see anything away yonder towards Isengard ? ’ 
  ‘ Many miles lie between , ’ said Legolas , gazing thither and shading Éomer eyes with Éomer long hand . ‘ I can see a darkness . There are shapes moving in bank , great shapes far away upon the bank of the river ; but what shapes are I can not tell . It is not mist or cloud that defeats my eyes : there is a veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land , and power marches slowly down stream . It is as if the twilight under endless trees were flowing downwards from the hills . ’ 
  ‘ And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ twilight will be a black night . ’ 
  As the second day of Gandalf riding drew on , the heaviness in the air increased . In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake hills : a sombre canopy with great billowing edges flecked with dazzling light . The sun went down , blood - red in a smoking haze . The spears of the Riders were tipped with fire as the last shafts of light kindled the steep faces of the peaks of Thrihyrne : now very near spears stood on the northernmost arm of the White Mountains , three jagged horns staring at the sunset . In the last red glow men in the vanguard saw a black speck , a horseman riding back towards men . men halted awaiting horseman . 
  horseman came , a weary man with dinted helm and cloven shield . Slowly horseman climbed from horseman horse and stood there a while gasping . At length horseman spoke . ‘ Is Éomer here ? ’ horseman asked . ‘ You come at last , but too late , and with too little strength . Things have gone evilly since Théodred fell . We were driven back yesterday over the Isen with great loss ; many perished at the crossing . Then at night fresh forces came over the river against our camp . All Isengard must be emptied ; and Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and herd - folk of Dunland beyond the rivers , and these also Saruman loosed upon us . We were overmastered . The shield - wall was broken . Erkenbrand of Westfold has drawn off those men Saruman could gather towards Saruman fastness in Helm ’s Deep . The rest are scattered . 
  ‘ Where is Éomer ? Tell Éomer there is no hope ahead . Éomer should return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there . ’ 
  Théoden had sat silent , hidden from the Edoras ’s sight behind Edoras guards ; now Edoras urged Edoras horse forward . ‘ Come , stand before me , Ceorl ! ’ Edoras said . ‘ I am here . The last host of the Eorlingas has ridden forth . host will not return without battle . ’ 
  The man ’s face lightened with joy and wonder . man drew man up . Then man knelt , offering man notched sword to the king . ‘ Command me , lord ! ’ man cried . ‘ And pardon me ! I thought — ’ 
  ‘ You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter snow . So it was when you rode to war . But a west wind has shaken the boughs , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Give this Théoden a fresh horse ! Let us ride to the help of Erkenbrand ! ’ 
  While Théoden was speaking , Gandalf rode a short way ahead , and Gandalf sat there alone , gazing north to Isengard and west to the setting sun . Now Gandalf came back . 
  ‘ Ride , Théoden ! ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Ride to Helm ’s Deep ! Go not to the Fords of Isen , and do not tarry in the plain ! I must leave you for a while . Shadowfax must bear me now on a swift errand . ’ Turning to Aragorn and Éomer and the Shadowfax of the king ’s household , Aragorn cried : ‘ Keep well the Lord of the Mark , till I return . Await me at Helm ’s Gate ! Farewell ! ’ 
  Aragorn spoke a word to Shadowfax , and like an arrow from the bow the great horse sprang away . Even as Shadowfax looked Aragorn was gone : a flash of silver in the sunset , a wind over the grass , a shadow that fled and passed from sight . Snowmane snorted and reared , eager to follow ; but only a swift bird on the wing could have overtaken Snowmane . 
  ‘ What does that mean ? ’ said one of the guard to Háma . 
  ‘ That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste , ’ answered Háma . ‘ Ever Greyhame goes and comes unlooked - for . ’ 
  ‘ Wormtongue , were Greyhame here , would not find Wormtongue hard to explain , ’ said the other . 
  ‘ True enough , ’ said Háma ; ‘ but for myself , I will wait until I see Gandalf again . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe you will wait long , ’ said the other . 
  The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and bent Fords course southward . Night fell , and still Fords rode on . The hills drew near , but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening sky . Still some miles away , on the far side of the Westfold Vale , a great bay in the mountains , lay a green coomb , out of which a gorge opened in the hills . Men of that land called gorge Helm ’s Deep , after a hero of old wars who had made Deep refuge there . Ever steeper and narrower gorge wound inward from the north under the shadow of the Thrihyrne , till the crowhaunted cliffs rose like mighty towers on either side , shutting out the light . 
  At Helm ’s Gate , before the mouth of the Deep , there was a heel of rock thrust outward by the northern cliff . There upon rock spur stood high walls of ancient stone , and within walls was a lofty tower . Men said that in the far - off days of the glory of Gondor the sea - kings had built here this fastness with the hands of giants . The Hornburg Gondor was called , for a trumpet sounded upon the tower echoed in the Deep behind , as if armies long - forgotten were issuing to war from caves beneath the hills . A wall , too , the Deep of old had made from the Hornburg to the southern cliff , barring the entrance to the gorge . Beneath Hornburg by a wide culvert the Deeping - stream passed out . About the feet of the Hornrock Hornburg wound , and flowed then in a gully through the midst of a wide green gore , sloping gently down from Helm ’s Gate to Helm ’s Dike . Thence Hornburg fell into the Deeping - coomb and out into the Westfold Vale . There in the Hornburg at Helm ’s Gate Erkenbrand , master of Westfold on the borders of the Mark , now dwelt . As the days darkened with threat of war , being wise , Westfold had repaired the wall and made the fastness strong . 
  The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the Coomb , when cries and hornblasts were heard from Riders scouts that went in front . Out of the darkness arrows whistled . Swiftly a scout rode back and reported that wolf - riders were abroad in the valley , and that a host of Orcs and wild men were hurrying southward from the Fords of Isen and seemed to be making for Helm ’s Deep . 
  ‘ We have found many of our folk lying slain as scout fled thither , ’ said the scout . ‘ And we have met scattered companies , going this way and that , leaderless . What has become of Erkenbrand none seem to know . It is likely that Erkenbrand will be overtaken ere Isen can reach Helm ’s Gate , if Isen has not already perished . ’ 
  ‘ Has aught been seen of Gandalf ? ’ asked Théoden . 
  ‘ Yes , lord . Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse , passing hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass . Some thought man was Saruman . It is said that man went away ere nightfall towards Isengard . Some say also that Wormtongue was seen earlier , going northward with a company of Orcs . ’ 
  ‘ Some will go ill with Wormtongue , if Gandalf comes upon man , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Nonetheless I miss now both my counsellors , the old and the new . But in this need we have no better choice than to go on , as Gandalf said , to Helm ’s Gate , whether Erkenbrand be there or no . Is Erkenbrand known how great is the host that comes from the North ? ’ 
  ‘ Erkenbrand is very great , ’ said the scout . ‘ Gandalf that flies counts every foeman twice , yet I have spoken to stouthearted men , and I do not doubt that the main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that we have here . ’ 
  ‘ Then let us be swift , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Let us drive through such foes as are already between us and the fastness . There are caves in Helm ’s Deep where hundreds may lie hid ; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills . ’ 
  ‘ Trust not to secret ways , ’ said the king . ‘ Saruman has long spied out this land . Still in that place our defence may last long . Let us go ! ’ 
  Aragorn and Legolas went now with Éomer in the van . On through the dark night Aragorn rode , ever slower as the darkness deepened and Aragorn way climbed southward , higher and higher into the dim folds about the mountains ’ feet . Aragorn found few of the enemy before feet . Here and there feet came upon roving bands of Orcs ; but feet fled ere the Riders could take or slay feet . 
  ‘ defence will not be long I fear , ’ said Éomer , ‘ ere the coming of the king ’s host will be known to the leader of our enemies , Saruman or whatever captain Éomer has sent forth . ’ 
  The rumour of war grew behind feet . Now feet could hear , borne over the dark , the sound of harsh singing . feet had climbed far up into the Deeping - coomb when feet looked back . Then feet saw torches , countless points of fiery light upon the black fields behind , scattered like red flowers , or winding up from the lowlands in long flickering lines . Here and there a larger blaze leapt up . 
  ‘ blaze is a great host and follows us hard , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ host bring fire , ’ said Théoden , ‘ and host are burning as host come , rick , cot , and tree . This was a rich vale and had many homesteads . Alas for my folk ! ’ 
  ‘ Would that day was here and we might ride down upon homesteads like a storm out of the mountains ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ folk grieves me to fly before homesteads . ’ 
  ‘ We need not fly much further , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Not far ahead now lies Helm ’s Dike , an ancient trench and rampart scored across the coomb , two furlongs below Helm ’s Gate . There we can turn and give battle . ’ 
  ‘ Nay , we are too few to defend the Dike , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Dike is a mile long or more , and the breach in Dike is wide . ’ 
  ‘ At the breach our rearguard must stand , if we are pressed , ’ said Éomer . 
  There was neither star nor moon when the Riders came to the breach in the Dike , where the stream from above passed out , and the road beside stream ran down from the Hornburg . The rampart loomed suddenly before Riders , a high shadow beyond a dark pit . As Riders rode up a sentinel challenged Riders . 
  ‘ The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm ’s Gate , ’ Éomer answered . ‘ I , Éomer son of Éomund , speak . ’ 
  ‘ This is good tidings beyond hope , ’ said the sentinel . ‘ Hasten ! The enemy is on your heels . ’ 
  The host passed through the breach and halted on the sloping sward above . host now learned to host joy that Erkenbrand had left many men to hold Helm ’s Gate , and more had since escaped thither . 
  ‘ Maybe , we have a thousand fit to fight on foot , ’ said Gamling , an old man , the leader of those that watched the Dike . ‘ But most of foot have seen too many winters , as I have , or too few , as my son ’s son here . What news of Erkenbrand ? Word came yesterday that Word was retreating hither with all that is left of the best Riders of Westfold . But Erkenbrand has not come . ’ 
  ‘ I fear that Westfold will not come now , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Our scouts have gained no news of Éomer , and the enemy fills all the valley behind us . ’ 
  ‘ I would that Éomer had escaped , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Éomer was a mighty man . In Éomer lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand . But we can not await Éomer here . We must draw all our forces now behind the walls . Are you well stored ? We bring little provision , for we rode forth to open battle , not to a siege . ’ 
  ‘ Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of Westfold , old and young , children and women , ’ said Gamling . ‘ But great store of food , and many beasts and store fodder , have also been gathered there . ’ 
  ‘ That is well , ’ said Éomer . ‘ store are burning or despoiling all that is left in the vale . ’ 
  ‘ If store come to bargain for our goods at Helm ’s Gate , store will pay a high price , ’ said Gamling . 
  The king and Gamling Riders passed on . Before the causeway that crossed the stream king dismounted . In a long file king led king horses up the ramp and passed within the gates of the Hornburg . There king were welcomed again with joy and renewed hope ; for now there were men enough to man both the burg and the barrier wall . 
  Quickly Éomer set Éomer men in readiness . The king and the Éomer of Gamling household were in the Hornburg , and there also were many of the Westfold - men . But on the Deeping Wall and Hornburg tower , and behind Hornburg , Éomer arrayed most of the strength that Gamling had , for here the defence seemed more doubtful , if the assault were determined and in great force . The horses were led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared . 
  The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high , and so thick that four men could walk abreast along the top , sheltered by a parapet over which only a tall man could look . Here and there were clefts in the stone through which men could shoot . This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a door in the outer court of the Hornburg ; three flights of steps led also up on to the wall from the Deep behind ; but in front battlement was smooth , and the great stones of battlement were set with such skill that no foothold could be found at stones joints , and at the top stones hung over like a sea - delved cliff . 
  Gimli stood leaning against the breastwork upon the wall . Legolas sat above on the parapet , fingering man bow , and peering out into the gloom . 
  ‘ This is more to my liking , ’ said the dwarf , stamping on the stones . ‘ Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains . There is good rock here . This country has tough bones . I felt bones in my feet as we came up from the dike . Give me a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place that armies would break upon like water . ’ 
  ‘ I do not doubt this , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But you are a dwarf , and dwarves are strange folk . I do not like this place , and I shall like place no more by the light of day . But you comfort me , Gimli , and I am glad to have you standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe . I wish there were more of your kin among us . But even more would I give for a hundred good archers of Mirkwood . We shall need archers . The Rohirrim have good bowmen after bowmen fashion , but there are too few here , too few . ’ 
  ‘ Rohirrim is dark for archery , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Indeed Rohirrim is time for sleep . Sleep ! I feel the need of Rohirrim , as never I thought any dwarf could . Riding is tiring work . Yet my axe is restless in my hand . Give me a row of orc - necks and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me ! ’ 
  A slow time passed . Far down in the valley scattered fires still burned . The hosts of Isengard were advancing in silence now . hosts torches could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines . 
  Suddenly from the Dike yells and screams , and the fierce battlecries of men broke out . Flaming brands appeared over the brink and clustered thickly at the breach . Then brands scattered and vanished . Men came galloping back over the field and up the ramp to the gate of the Hornburg . The rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in . 
  ‘ The enemy is at hand ! ’ Westfolders said . ‘ We loosed every arrow that we had , and filled the Dike with Orcs . But Dike will not halt enemy long . Already enemy are scaling the bank at many points , thick as marching ants . But we have taught enemy not to carry torches . ’ 
  Dike was now past midnight . The sky was utterly dark , and the stillness of the heavy air foreboded storm . Suddenly the clouds were seared by a blinding flash . Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills . For a staring moment the watchers on the walls saw all the space between watchers and the Dike lit with white light : Dike was boiling and crawling with black shapes , some squat and broad , some tall and grim , with high helms and sable shields . Hundreds and hundreds more were pouring over the Dike and through the breach . The dark tide flowed up to the walls from cliff to cliff . Thunder rolled in the valley . Rain came lashing down . 
  Arrows thick as the rain came whistling over the battlements , and fell clinking and glancing on the stones . Some found a mark . The assault on Helm ’s Deep had begun , but no sound or challenge was heard within ; no answering arrows came . 
  The assailing hosts halted , foiled by the silent menace of rock and wall . Ever and again the lightning tore aside the darkness . Then the Orcs screamed , waving spear and sword , and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that stood revealed upon the battlements ; and the men of the Mark amazed looked out , as it seemed to men , upon a great field of dark corn , tossed by a tempest of war , and every ear glinted with barbed light . 
  Brazen trumpets sounded . The enemy surged forward , some against the Deeping Wall , others towards the causeway and the ramp that led up to the Hornburg - gates . There the hugest Orcs were mustered , and the wild men of the Dunland fells . A moment Orcs hesitated and then on Orcs came . The lightning flashed , and blazoned upon every helm and shield the ghastly hand of Isengard was seen . Orcs reached the summit of the rock ; Orcs drove towards the gates . 
  Then at last an answer came : a storm of arrows met Orcs , and a hail of stones . Orcs wavered , broke , and fled back ; and then charged again , broke and charged again ; and each time , like the incoming sea , Orcs halted at a higher point . Again trumpets rang , and a press of roaring men leaped forth . men held men great shields above Orcs like a roof , while in men midst men bore two trunks of mighty trees . Behind men orc - archers crowded , sending a hail of darts against the bowmen on the walls . men gained the gates . The trees , swung by strong arms , smote the timbers with a rending boom . If any man fell , crushed by a stone hurtling from above , two others sprang to take man place . Again and again the great rams swung and crashed . 
  Éomer and Aragorn stood together on the Deeping Wall . Éomer heard the roar of voices and the thudding of the rams ; and then in a sudden flash of light Éomer beheld the peril of the gates . 
  ‘ Come ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ This is the hour when we draw swords together ! ’ 
  Running like fire , Éomer sped along the wall , and up the steps , and passed into the outer court upon the Rock . As Éomer ran Éomer gathered a handful of stout swordsmen . There was a small postern - door that opened in an angle of the burg - wall on the west , where the cliff stretched out to meet cliff . On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate , between the wall and the sheer brink of the Rock . Together Éomer and Aragorn sprang through the door , Éomer men close behind . The two swords flashed from the sheath as one . 
  ‘ Gúthwinë ! ’ cried Éomer . ‘ Gúthwinë for the Mark ! ’ 
  ‘ Andúril ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ Andúril for the Dúnedain ! ’ 
  Charging from the side , Éomer hurled Éomer upon the wild Dúnedain . Andúril rose fell , gleaming with white fire . A shout went up from wall and tower : ‘ Andúril ! Andúril goes to war . The Blade that was Broken shines again ! ’ 
  Dismayed the rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight ; but the wall of rammers shields was broken as by a lightning - stroke , and rammers were swept away , hewn down , or cast over the Rock into the stony stream below . The orc - archers shot wildly and then fled . 
  For a moment Éomer and Aragorn halted before the gates . The thunder was rumbling in the distance now . The lightning flickered still , far off among the mountains in the South . A keen wind was blowing from the North again . The clouds were torn and drifting , and stars peeped out ; and above the hills of the Coomb - side the westering moon rode , glimmering yellow in the storm - wrack . 
  ‘ We did not come too soon , ’ said Aragorn , looking at the gates . gates great hinges and iron bars were wrenched and bent ; many of gates timbers were cracked . ‘ The doors will not withstand another such battering . ’ 
  ‘ Yet we can not stay here beyond the walls to defend doors , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Look ! ’ Éomer pointed to the causeway . Already a great press of Orcs and Men were gathering again beyond the stream . Arrows whined , and skipped on the stones about Orcs . ‘ Come ! We must get back and see what we can do to pile stone and beam across the gates within . Come now ! ’ 
  Orcs turned and ran . At that moment some dozen Orcs that had lain motionless among the slain leaped to Orcs feet , and came silently and swiftly behind . Two flung Two to the ground at Éomer ’s heels , tripped Éomer , and in a moment Two were on top of Orcs . But a small dark figure that none had observed sprang out of the shadows and gave a hoarse shout : Baruk Khazâd ! Khazâd ai - mênu ! An axe swung and swept back . Two Orcs fell headless . The rest fled . 
  Éomer struggled to Khazâd feet , even as Aragorn ran back to Khazâd aid . 
  The postern was closed again , the iron door was barred and piled inside with stones . When all were safe within , Éomer turned : ‘ I thank you , Gimli son of Glóin ! ’ Khazâd said . ‘ I did not know that you were with us in the sortie . But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company . How came you there ? ’ 
  ‘ I followed you to shake off sleep , ’ said Gimli ; ‘ but I looked on the hillmen and hillmen seemed over large for me , so I sat beside a stone to see your sword - play . ’ 
  ‘ I shall not find stone easy to repay you , ’ said Éomer . 
  ‘ There may be many a chance ere the night is over , ’ laughed the Dwarf . ‘ But I am content . Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria . ’ 
  ‘ Two ! ’ said Gimli , patting Gimli axe . Gimli had returned to Gimli place on the wall . 
  ‘ Two ? ’ said Legolas . ‘ I have done better , though now I must grope for spent arrows ; all mine are gone . Yet I make my tale twenty at the least . But that is only a few leaves in a forest . ’ 
  The sky now was quickly clearing and the sinking moon was shining brightly . But the light brought little hope to the Riders of the Mark . The enemy before Riders seemed to have grown rather than diminished , and still more were pressing up from the valley through the breach . The sortie upon the Rock gained only a brief respite . The assault on the gates was redoubled . Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a sea . Orcs and hillmen swarmed about Orcs feet from end to end . Ropes with grappling hooks were hurled over the parapet faster than men could cut Ropes or fling Ropes back . Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up . Many were cast down in ruin , but many more replaced Ropes , and Orcs sprang up Ropes like apes in the dark forests of the South . Before the wall ’s foot the dead and broken were piled like shingle in a storm ; ever higher rose the hideous mounds , and still the enemy came on . 
  The men of Rohan grew weary . All men arrows were spent , and every shaft was shot ; men swords were notched , and men shields were riven . Three times Aragorn and Éomer rallied men , and three times Andúril flamed in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall . 
  Then a clamour arose in the Deep behind . Orcs had crept like rats through the culvert through which the stream flowed out . There rats had gathered in the shadow of the cliffs , until the assault above was hottest and nearly all the Deep of the defence had rushed to the wall ’s top . Then rats sprang out . Already some had passed into the jaws of the Deep and were among the horses , fighting with the guards . 
  Down from the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce cry that echoed in the cliffs . ‘ Khazâd ! Khazâd ! ’ Gimli soon had work enough . 
  ‘ Ai - oi ! ’ Gimli shouted . ‘ The Orcs are behind the wall . Ai - oi ! Come , Legolas ! There are enough for us both . Khazâd ai - mênu ! ’ 
  Gamling the Old looked down from the Hornburg , hearing the great voice of the dwarf above all the tumult . ‘ The Orcs are in the Deep ! ’ Orcs cried . ‘ Helm ! Helm ! Forth Helmingas ! ’ Helmingas shouted as Helmingas leaped down the stair from the Rock with many men of Westfold at Helmingas back . 
  men onset was fierce and sudden , and the Orcs gave way before men . Ere long men were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge , and all were slain or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the guardians of the hidden caves . 
  ‘ Twenty - one ! ’ cried Gimli . Gimli hewed a two - handed stroke and laid the last Orc before Gimli feet . ‘ Now my count passes Master Legolas again . ’ 
  ‘ We must stop this rat - hole , ’ said Gamling . ‘ Dwarves are said to be cunning folk with stone . Lend us your aid , master ! ’ 
  ‘ We do not shape stone with battle - axes , nor with our finger - nails , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But I will help as I may . ’ 
  feet gathered such small boulders and broken stones as feet could find to hand , and under Gimli ’s direction the Westfold - Gimli blocked up the inner end of the culvert , until only a narrow outlet remained . Then the Deeping - stream , swollen by the rain , churned and fretted in stream choked path , and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff . 
  ‘ master will be drier above , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Come , Gamling , let us see how things go on the wall ! ’ 
  end climbed up and found Legolas beside Aragorn and Éomer . The elf was whetting Éomer long knife . There was for a while a lull in the assault , since the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled . 
  ‘ Twenty - one ! ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ Good ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ But my count is now two dozen . count has been knife - work up here . ’ 
  Éomer and Aragorn leant wearily on Éomer swords . Away on the left the crash and clamour of the battle on the Rock rose loud again . But the Hornburg still held fast , like an island in the sea . Hornburg gates lay in ruin ; but over the barricade of beams and stones within no enemy as yet had passed . 
  Aragorn looked at the pale stars , and at the moon , now sloping behind the western hills that enclosed the valley . ‘ This is a night as long as years , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ How long will the day tarry ? ’ 
  ‘ Dawn is not far off , ’ said Gamling , who had now climbed up beside Aragorn . ‘ But dawn will not help us , I fear . ’ 
  ‘ Yet dawn is ever the hope of men , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ But these creatures of Isengard , these half - orcs and goblin - men that the foul craft of Saruman has bred , men will not quail at the sun , ’ said Gamling . ‘ And neither will the wild Gamling of the hills . Do you not hear hills voices ? ’ 
  ‘ I hear hills , ’ said Éomer ; ‘ but hills are only the scream of birds and the bellowing of beasts to my ears . ’ 
  ‘ Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue , ’ said Gamling . 
  ‘ I know that tongue . tongue is an ancient speech of men , and once was spoken in many western valleys of the Mark . Hark ! men hate us , and men are glad ; for our doom seems certain to men . “ The king , the king ! ” men cry . “ We will take king king . Death to the Forgoil ! Death to the Strawheads ! Death to the robbers of the North ! ” Such names names have for us . Not in half a thousand years have names forgotten names grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the Mark to Eorl the Young and made alliance with Mark . That old hatred Saruman has inflamed . names are fierce folk when roused . names will not give way now for dusk or dawn , until Théoden is taken , or names names are slain . ’ 
  ‘ Nonetheless day will bring hope to me , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Is Théoden not said that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg , if men defended Hornburg ? ’ 
  ‘ So the minstrels say , ’ said Éomer . 
  ‘ Then let us defend Hornburg , and hope ! ’ said Aragorn . 
  Even as trumpets spoke there came a blare of trumpets . Then there was a crash and a flash of flame and smoke . The waters of the Deeping - stream poured out hissing and foaming : waters were choked no longer , a gaping hole was blasted in the wall . A host of dark shapes poured in . 
  ‘ Devilry of Saruman ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ Aragorn have crept in the culvert again , while we talked , and Saruman have lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our feet . Elendil , Elendil ! ’ Orthanc shouted , as host leaped down into the breach ; but even as host did so a hundred ladders were raised against the battlements . Over the wall and under the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark wave upon a hill of sand . The defence was swept away . Some of the Riders were driven back , further and further into the Deep , falling and fighting as Riders gave way , step by step , towards the caves . Others cut Others way back towards the citadel . 
  A broad stairway climbed from the Deep up to the Rock and the rear - gate of the Hornburg . Near the bottom stood Aragorn . In Aragorn hand still Andúril gleamed , and the terror of the sword for a while held back the enemy , as one by one all who could gain the stair passed up towards the gate . Behind on the upper steps knelt Legolas . Aragorn bow was bent , but one gleaned arrow was all that Aragorn had left , and Aragorn peered out now , ready to shoot the first Orc that should dare to approach the stair . 
  ‘ All who can have now got safe within , Aragorn , ’ Aragorn called . ‘ Come back ! ’ 
  Aragorn turned and sped up the stair ; but as Aragorn ran Aragorn stumbled in Aragorn weariness . At once Aragorn enemies leapt forward . Up came the Orcs , yelling , with enemies long arms stretched out to seize Aragorn . The foremost fell with Legolas ’ last arrow in Aragorn throat , but the rest sprang over Aragorn . Then a great boulder , cast from the outer wall above , crashed down upon the stair , and hurled enemies back into the Deep . Aragorn gained the door , and swiftly door clanged to behind Deep . 
  ‘ Things go ill , my friends , ’ Deep said , wiping the sweat from Deep brow with Deep arm . 
  ‘ Ill enough , ’ said Legolas , ‘ but not yet hopeless , while we have you with us . Where is Gimli ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not know , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I last saw Gimli fighting on the ground behind the wall , but the enemy swept us apart . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! That is evil news , ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Gimli is stout and strong , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Let us hope that Gimli will escape back to the caves . There Gimli would be safe for a while . Safer than we . Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf . ’ 
  ‘ That must be my hope , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But I wish that Gimli had come this way . I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty - nine . ’ 
  ‘ If Gimli wins back to the caves , Gimli will pass your count again , ’ laughed Aragorn . ‘ Never did I see an axe so wielded . ’ 
  ‘ I must go and seek some arrows , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Would that this night would end , and I could have better light for shooting . ’ 
  Aragorn now passed into the citadel . There to Aragorn dismay Aragorn learned that Éomer had not reached the Hornburg . 
  ‘ Nay , Aragorn did not come to the Rock , ’ said one of the Westfold - Aragorn . ‘ I last saw Rock gathering men about Éomer and fighting in the mouth of the Deep . Gamling was with Éomer , and the dwarf ; but I could not come to men . ’ 
  Aragorn strode on through the inner court , and mounted to a high chamber in the tower . There stood the king , dark against a narrow window , looking out upon the vale . 
  ‘ What is the news , Aragorn ? ’ king said . 
  ‘ The Deeping Wall is taken , lord , and all the defence swept away ; but many have escaped hither to the Rock . ’ 
  ‘ Is Éomer here ? ’ 
  ‘ No , lord . But many of your men retreated into the Deep ; and some say that Éomer was amongst men . In the narrows Éomer may hold back the enemy and come within the caves . What hope men may have then I do not know . ’ 
  ‘ More than we . Good provision , enemy is said . And the air is wholesome there because of the outlets through fissures in the rock far above . None can force an entrance against determined men . men may hold out long . ’ 
  ‘ But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ men have a blasting fire , and with fire men took the Wall . If men can not come in the caves , men may seal up those that are inside . But now we must turn all our thought to our own defence . ’ 
  ‘ I fret in this prison , ’ said Théoden . ‘ If I could have set a spear in rest , riding before my men upon the field , maybe I could have felt again the joy of battle , and so ended . But I serve little purpose here . ’ 
  ‘ Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the Mark , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ More hope we have to defend you in the Hornburg than in Edoras , or even at Dunharrow in the mountains . ’ 
  ‘ It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault , ’ said Théoden ; ‘ but now my heart is doubtful . The world changes , and all that once was strong now proves unsure . How shall any tower withstand such numbers and such reckless hate ? Had I known that the strength of Isengard was grown so great , maybe I should not so rashly have ridden forth to meet Isengard , for all the arts of Gandalf . world counsel seems not now so good as counsel did under the morning sun . ’ 
  ‘ Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf , until all is over , lord , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ The end will not be long , ’ said the king . ‘ But I will not end here , taken like an old badger in a trap . Snowmane and Hasufel and the horses of my guard are in the inner court . When dawn comes , I will bid men sound Helm ’s horn , and I will ride forth . Will you ride with me then , son of Arathorn ? Maybe we shall cleave a road , or make such an end as will be worth a song – if any be left to sing of us hereafter . ’ 
  ‘ I will ride with you , ’ said Aragorn . 
  Taking Aragorn leave , Aragorn returned to the walls , and passed round all walls circuit , enheartening the Aragorn , and lending aid wherever the assault was hot . Legolas went with Arathorn . Blasts of fire leaped up from below shaking the stones . Grappling - hooks were hurled , and ladders raised . Again and again the Orcs gained the summit of the outer wall , and again the defenders cast ladders down . 
  At last Aragorn stood above the great gates , heedless of the darts of the enemy . As Aragorn looked forth Orcs saw the eastern sky grow pale . Then enemy raised enemy empty hand , palm outward in token of parley . 
  The Orcs yelled and jeered . ‘ Come down ! Come down ! ’ hand cried . ‘ If you wish to speak to us , come down ! Bring out your king ! We are the fighting Uruk - hai . We will fetch king from king hole , if king does not come . Bring out your skulking king ! ’ 
  ‘ The king stays or comes at king own will , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Then what are you doing here ? ’ Aragorn answered . ‘ Why do you look out ? Do you wish to see the greatness of our army ? We are the fighting Uruk - hai . ’ 
  ‘ I looked out to see the dawn , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ What of the dawn ? ’ Aragorn jeered . ‘ We are the Uruk - hai : we do not stop the fight for night or day , for fair weather or for storm . We come to kill , by sun or moon . What of the dawn ? ’ 
  ‘ None knows what the new day shall bring sun , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Get you gone , ere None turn to your evil . ’ 
  ‘ Get down or we will shoot you from the wall , ’ Aragorn cried . ‘ This is no parley . You have nothing to say . ’ 
  ‘ I have still this to say , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ No enemy has yet taken the Hornburg . Depart , or not one of you will be spared . Not one will be left alive to take back tidings to the North . You do not know your peril . ’ 
  So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn , as Aragorn stood there alone above the ruined gates before the host of Aragorn enemies , that many of the wild Aragorn paused , and looked back over gates shoulders to the valley , and some looked up doubtfully at the sky . But the Orcs laughed with loud voices ; and a hail of darts and arrows whistled over the wall , as Aragorn leaped down . 
  There was a roar and a blast of fire . The archway of the gate above which Orcs had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smoke and dust . The barricade was scattered as if by a thunderbolt . Aragorn ran to the king ’s tower . 
  But even as the gate fell , and the Orcs about gate yelled , preparing to charge , a murmur arose behind king , like a wind in the distance , and murmur grew to a clamour of many voices crying strange news in the dawn . The Orcs upon the Rock , hearing the rumour of dismay , wavered and looked back . And then , sudden and terrible , from the tower above , the sound of the great horn of Helm rang out . 
  All that heard that sound trembled . Many of the Orcs cast Orcs on All faces and covered All ears with All claws . Back from the Deep the echoes came , blast upon blast , as if on every cliff and hill a mighty herald stood . But on the walls men looked up , listening with wonder ; for the echoes did not die . Ever the hornblasts wound on among the hills ; nearer now and louder hornblasts answered one to another , blowing fierce and free . 
  ‘ Helm ! Helm ! ’ the Riders shouted . ‘ Helm is arisen and comes back to war . Helm for Théoden King ! ’ 
  And with that shout the king came . king horse was white as snow , golden was horse shield , and horse spear was long . At horse right hand was Aragorn , Elendil ’s heir , behind horse rode the lords of the House of Eorl the Young . Light sprang in the sky . Night departed . 
  ‘ Forth Eorlingas ! ’ With a cry and a great noise cry charged . Down from the gates cry roared , over the causeway cry swept , and cry drove through the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass . Behind cry from the Deep came the stern cries of men issuing from the caves , driving forth the enemy . Out poured all the men that were left upon the Rock . And ever the sound of blowing horns echoed in the hills . 
  On men rode , the king and king companions . Captains and champions fell or fled before men . Neither orc nor man withstood Captains . Captains backs were to the swords and spears of the Riders , and Captains faces to the valley . Captains cried and wailed , for fear and great wonder had come upon Riders with the rising of the day . 
  So King Théoden rode from Helm ’s Gate and clove man path to the great Dike . There the Gate halted . Light grew bright about company . Shafts of the sun flared above the eastern hills and glimmered on company spears . But company sat silent on company horses , and company gazed down upon the Deeping - coomb . 
  The land had changed . Where before the green dale had lain , dale grassy slopes lapping the ever - mounting hills , there now a forest loomed . Great trees , bare and silent , stood , rank on rank , with tangled bough and hoary head ; trees twisted roots were buried in the long green grass . Darkness was under trees . Between the Dike and the eaves of that nameless wood only two open furlongs lay . There now cowered the proud hosts of Saruman , in terror of the king and in terror of the trees . hosts streamed down from Helm ’s Gate until all above the Dike was empty of all , but below Dike all were packed like swarming flies . Vainly all crawled and clambered about the walls of the coomb , seeking to escape . Upon the east too sheer and stony was the valley ’s side ; upon the left , from the west , all final doom approached . 
  There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider , clad in white , shining in the rising sun . Over the low hills the horns were sounding . Behind rider , hastening down the long slopes , were a thousand men on foot ; men swords were in men hands . Amid men strode a man tall and strong . man shield was red . As man came to the valley ’s brink , man set to man lips a great black horn and blew a ringing blast . 
  ‘ Erkenbrand ! ’ the Riders shouted . ‘ Erkenbrand ! ’ 
  ‘ Behold the White Rider ! ’ cried Aragorn . ‘ Gandalf is come again ! ’ 
  ‘ Mithrandir , Mithrandir ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ This is wizardry indeed ! Come ! I would look on this forest , ere the spell changes . ’ 
  The hosts of Isengard roared , swaying this way and that , turning from fear to fear . Again the horn sounded from the tower . Down through the breach of the Dike charged the king ’s company . Down from the hills leaped Erkenbrand , lord of Westfold . Down leaped Shadowfax , like a deer that runs surefooted in the mountains . The White Rider was upon mountains , and the terror of Shadowfax coming filled the enemy with madness . The wild Shadowfax fell on mountains faces before deer . The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and spear . Like a black smoke driven by a mounting wind mountains fled . Wailing mountains passed under the waiting shadow of the trees ; and from that shadow none ever came again . 
  Chapter 8 
  THE ROAD TO ISENGARD 
  So it was that in the light of a fair morning King Théoden and Gandalf the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the Deeping - stream . There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn , and Legolas the Elf , and Erkenbrand of Westfold , and the lords of the Golden House . About Aragorn were gathered the Rohirrim , the Riders of the Mark : wonder overcame Aragorn joy in victory , and Aragorn eyes were turned towards the wood . 
  Suddenly there was a great shout , and down from the Dike came those who had been driven back into the Deep . There came Gamling the Old , and Éomer son of Éomund , and beside those walked Gimli the dwarf . Éomer had no helm , and about Éomer head was a linen band stained with blood ; but Éomer voice was loud and strong . 
  ‘ Forty - two , Master Legolas ! ’ Éomer cried . ‘ Alas ! My axe is notched : the forty - second had an iron collar on Éomer neck . How is axe with you ? ’ 
  ‘ You have passed my score by one , ’ answered Legolas . ‘ But I do not grudge you the game , so glad am I to see you on your legs ! ’ 
  ‘ Welcome , Éomer , sister - son ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ Now that I see you safe , I am glad indeed . ’ 
  ‘ Hail , Lord of the Mark ! ’ said Éomer . ‘ The dark night has passed , and day has come again . But the day has brought strange tidings . ’ Éomer turned and gazed in wonder , first at the wood and then at Gandalf . ‘ Once more you come in the hour of need , unlooked - for , ’ Éomer said . 
  ‘ Unlooked - for ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I said that I would return and meet you here . ’ 
  ‘ But you did not name the hour , nor foretell the manner of your coming . Strange help you bring . You are mighty in wizardry , Gandalf the White ! ’ 
  ‘ That may be . But if so , I have not shown That yet . I have but given good counsel in peril , and made use of the speed of Shadowfax . Your own valour has done more , and the stout legs of the Westfold - men marching through the night . ’ 
  Then legs all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder . Some glanced darkly at the wood , and passed legs hands over legs brows , as if legs thought legs eyes saw otherwise than Gandalf . 
  Gandalf laughed long and merrily . ‘ The trees ? ’ Shadowfax said . ‘ Nay , I see the wood as plainly as do you . But that is no deed of mine . that is a thing beyond the counsel of the wise . Better than my design , and better even than my hope the event has proved . ’ 
  ‘ Then if not yours , whose is the wizardry ? ’ said Théoden . ‘ Not Saruman ’s , that is plain . Is there some mightier sage , of whom we have yet to learn ? ’ 
  ‘ that is not wizardry , but a power far older , ’ said Gandalf : ‘ a power that walked the earth , ere elf sang or hammer rang . 
  Ere iron was found or tree was hewn , 
  When young was mountain under moon ; 
  Ere ring was made , or wrought was woe , 
  wrought walked the forests long ago . ’ 
  ‘ And what may be the answer to your riddle ? ’ said Théoden . 
  ‘ If you would learn that , you should come with me to Isengard , ’ answered Gandalf . 
  ‘ To Isengard ? ’ Gandalf cried . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I shall return to Isengard , and those who will may come with me . There we may see strange things . ’ 
  ‘ But there are not men enough in the Mark , not if men were all gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness , to assault the stronghold of Saruman , ’ said Théoden . 
  ‘ Nevertheless to Isengard I go , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I shall not stay there long . My way lies now eastward . Look for me in Edoras , ere the waning of the moon ! ’ 
  ‘ Nay ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ In the dark hour before dawn I doubted , but we will not part now . I will come with you , if that is your counsel . ’ 
  ‘ I wish to speak with Saruman , as soon as may be now , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and since Saruman has done you great injury , it would be fitting if you were there . But how soon and how swiftly will you ride ? ’ 
  ‘ My men are weary with battle , ’ said the King ; ‘ and I am weary also . For I have ridden far and slept little . Alas ! My old age is not feigned nor due only to the whisperings of Wormtongue . It is an ill that no leech can wholly cure , not even Gandalf . ’ 
  ‘ Then let all who are to ride with me rest now , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We will journey under the shadow of evening . all is as well ; for it is my counsel that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may be , henceforth . But do not command many men to go with you , Théoden . We go to a parley not to a fight . ’ 
  The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses , and King sent men forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark ; and men bore King summons also , bidding all men , young and old , to come in haste to Edoras . There the Lord of the Mark would hold an assembly of all that could bear arms , on the third day after the full moon . To ride with Éomer to Isengard the King chose Éomer and twenty men of Éomer household . With Gandalf would go Aragorn , and Legolas , and Gimli . In spite of Gandalf hurt the dwarf would not stay behind . 
  ‘ dwarf was only a feeble blow and the cap turned dwarf , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ dwarf would take more than such an orc - scratch to keep me back . ’ 
  ‘ I will tend dwarf , while you rest , ’ said Aragorn . 
  The king now returned to the Hornburg , and slept , such a sleep of quiet as Aragorn had not known for many years , and the remainder of Aragorn chosen company rested also . But the others , all that were not hurt or wounded , began a great labour ; for many had fallen in the battle and lay dead upon the field or in the Deep . 
  No Orcs remained alive ; No bodies were uncounted . But a great many of the hillmen had given No up ; and No were afraid , and cried for mercy . 
  The Men of the Mark took Men weapons from No , and set No to work . 
  ‘ Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined , ’ said Erkenbrand ; ‘ and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the Fords of Isen in arms , nor to march with the enemies of Men ; and then you shall go free back to your land . For you have been deluded by Saruman . Many of you have got death as the reward of your trust in Saruman ; but had you conquered , little better would your wages have been . ’ 
  The Saruman of Dunland were amazed ; for Saruman had told No that the Saruman of Rohan were cruel and burned No captives alive . 
  In the midst of the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised , and beneath No were laid all the Riders of the Mark who fell in the defence , those of the East Dales upon one side , and those of Westfold upon the other . But the Rohan of Dunland were set apart in a mound below the Dike . In a grave alone under the shadow of the Hornburg lay Háma , captain of the King ’s guard . captain fell before the Gate . 
  The Orcs were piled in great heaps , away from the mounds of Men , not far from the eaves of the forest . And the people were troubled in people minds ; for the heaps of carrion were too great for burial or for burning . people had little wood for firing , and none would have dared to take an axe to the strange trees , even if Gandalf had not warned people to hurt neither bark nor bough at people great peril . 
  ‘ Let the Orcs lie , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The morning may bring new counsel . ’ 
  In the afternoon the King ’s company prepared to depart . The work of burial was then but beginning ; and Théoden mourned for the loss of Háma , King captain , and cast the first earth upon King grave . ‘ Great injury indeed has Saruman done to me and all this land , ’ King said ; ‘ and I will remember Saruman , when we meet . ’ 
  The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the Coomb , when at last Théoden and Gandalf and Gandalf companions rode down from the Dike . Behind Gandalf were gathered a great host , both of the Riders and of the people of Westfold , old and young , women and children , who had come out from the caves . A song of victory Gandalf sang with clear voices ; and then Gandalf fell silent , wondering what would chance , for Gandalf eyes were on the trees and Gandalf feared eyes . 
  The Riders came to the wood , and Riders halted ; horse and man , Riders were unwilling to pass in . The trees were grey and menacing , and a shadow or a mist was about trees . The ends of trees long sweeping boughs hung down like searching fingers , trees roots stood up from the ground like the limbs of strange monsters , and dark caverns opened beneath trees . But Gandalf went forward , leading the company , and where the road from the Hornburg met the trees trees saw now an opening like an arched gate under mighty boughs ; and through Hornburg Gandalf passed , and trees followed man . Then to trees amazement trees found that the road ran on , and the Deeping - stream beside road ; and the sky was open above and full of golden light . But on either side the great aisles of the wood were already wrapped in dusk , stretching away into impenetrable shadows ; and there aisles heard the creaking and groaning of boughs , and far cries , and a rumour of wordless voices , murmuring angrily . No Orc or other living creature could be seen . 
  Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse ; and Orc kept close beside Gandalf , for Gimli was afraid of the wood . 
  ‘ Legolas is hot in here , ’ said Legolas to Gandalf . ‘ I feel a great wrath about me . Do you not feel the air throb in your ears ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ What has become of the miserable Orcs ? ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ That , I think , no one will ever know , ’ said Gandalf . 
  Orcs rode in silence for a while ; but Legolas was ever glancing from side to side , and would often have halted to listen to the sounds of the wood , if Gimli had allowed Legolas . 
  ‘ These are the strangest trees that ever I saw , ’ Gimli said ; ‘ and I have seen many an oak grow from acorn to ruinous age . I wish that there were leisure now to walk among voices : voices have voices , and in time I might come to understand voices thought . ’ 
  ‘ No , no ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ Let us leave voices ! I guess voices thought already : hatred of all that go on two legs ; and voices speech is of crushing and strangling . ’ 
  ‘ Not of all that go on two legs , ’ said Legolas . ‘ There I think you are wrong . It is Orcs that voices hate . For voices do not belong here and know little of Elves and Men . Far away are the valleys where voices sprang . From the deep dales of Fangorn , Gimli , that is whence voices come , I guess . ’ 
  ‘ Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle - earth , ’ said Gimli . ‘ I should be grateful for the part voices have played , but I do not love voices . You may think voices wonderful , but I have seen a greater wonder in this land , more beautiful than any grove or glade that ever grew : my heart is still full of land . 
  ‘ Strange are the ways of Men , Legolas ! Here Men have one of the marvels of the Northern World , and what do Men say of one ? Caves , Men say ! Caves ! Holes to fly to in time of war , to store fodder in ! My good Legolas , do you know that the caverns of Helm ’s Deep are vast and beautiful ? There would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves , merely to gaze at Dwarves , if such things were known to be . Aye indeed , Dwarves would pay pure gold for a brief glance ! ’ 
  ‘ And I would give gold to be excused , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ and double to be let out , if I strayed in ! ’ 
  ‘ You have not seen , so I forgive your jest , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But you speak like a fool . Do you think those halls are fair , where your King dwells under the hill in Mirkwood , and Dwarves helped in Dwarves making long ago ? Dwarves are but hovels compared with the caverns I have seen here : immeasurable halls , filled with an everlasting music of water that tinkles into pools , as fair as Kheled - zâram in the starlight . 
  ‘ And , Legolas , when the torches are kindled and men walk on the sandy floors under the echoing domes , ah ! then , Legolas , gems and crystals and veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls ; and the light glows through folded marbles , shell - like , translucent as the living hands of Queen Galadriel . There are columns of white and saffron and dawn - rose , Legolas , fluted and twisted into dreamlike forms ; columns spring up from many - coloured floors to meet the glistening pendants of the roof : wings , ropes , curtains fine as frozen clouds ; spears , banners , pinnacles of suspended palaces ! Still lakes mirror columns : a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered with clear glass ; cities , such as the mind of Durin could scarce have imagined in world sleep , stretch on through avenues and pillared courts , on into the dark recesses where no light can come . And plink ! a silver drop falls , and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea . Then evening comes : towers fade and twinkle out ; the torches pass on into another chamber and another dream . There is chamber after chamber , Legolas ; hall opening out of hall , dome after dome , stair beyond stair ; and still the winding paths lead on into the mountains ’ heart . Caves ! The Caverns of Helm ’s Deep ! Happy was the chance that drove me there ! Happy makes me weep to leave Caverns . ’ 
  ‘ Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort , Gimli , ’ said the Elf , ‘ that you may come safe from war and return to see paths again . But do not tell all your kindred ! There seems little left for paths to do , from your account . Maybe the men of this land are wise to say little : one family of busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than men made . ’ 
  ‘ No , you do not understand , ’ said Gimli . ‘ No dwarf could be unmoved by such loveliness . None of Durin ’s race would mine those caves for stones or ore , not if diamonds and gold could be got there . Do you cut down groves of blossoming trees in the springtime for firewood ? We would tend these glades of flowering stone , not quarry glades . With cautious skill , tap by tap – a small chip of rock and no more , perhaps , in a whole anxious day – so we could work , and as the years went by , we should open up new ways , and display far chambers that are still dark , glimpsed only as a void beyond fissures in the rock . And lights , Legolas ! We should make lights , such lamps as once shone in Khazad - dûm ; and when we wished we would drive away the night that has lain there since the hills were made ; and when we desired rest , we would let the night return . ’ 
  ‘ You move me , Gimli , ’ said Legolas . ‘ I have never heard you speak like this before . Almost you make me regret that I have not seen these caves . Come ! Let us make this bargain – if we both return safe out of the perils that await us , we will journey for a while together . You shall visit Fangorn with me , and then I will come with you to see Helm ’s Deep . ’ 
  ‘ That would not be the way of return that I should choose , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But I will endure Fangorn , if I have your promise to come back to the caves and share caves wonder with me . ’ 
  ‘ You have my promise , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But alas ! Now we must leave behind both cave and wood for a while . See ! We are coming to the end of the trees . How far is end to Isengard , Gandalf ? ’ 
  ‘ About fifteen leagues , as the crows of Saruman make Isengard , ’ said Gandalf : ‘ five from the mouth of Deeping - coomb to the Fords ; and ten more from there to the gates of Isengard . But we shall not ride all the way this night . ’ 
  ‘ And when we come there , what shall we see ? ’ asked Gimli . ‘ You may know , but I can not guess . ’ 
  ‘ I do not know myself for certain , ’ answered the wizard . ‘ I was there at nightfall yesterday , but much may have happened since . Yet I think that you will not say that the journey was in vain – not though the Glittering Caves of Aglarond be left behind . ’ 
  At last the company passed through the trees , and found that company had come to the bottom of the Coomb , where the road from Helm ’s Deep branched , going one way east to Edoras , and the other north to the Fords of Isen . As company rode from under the eaves of the wood , Legolas halted and looked back with regret . Then wizard gave a sudden cry . 
  ‘ There are eyes ! ’ wizard said . ‘ Eyes looking out from the shadows of the boughs ! I never saw such eyes before . ’ 
  The others , surprised by wizard cry , halted and turned ; but Legolas started to ride back . 
  ‘ No , no ! ’ cried Gimli . ‘ Do as you please in your madness , but let me first get down from this horse ! I wish to see no eyes ! ’ 
  ‘ Stay , Legolas Greenleaf ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Do not go back into the wood , not yet ! Now is not your time . ’ 
  Even as Gandalf spoke , there came forward out of the trees three strange shapes . As tall as trolls trolls were , twelve feet or more in height ; trolls strong bodies , stout as young trees , seemed to be clad with raiment or with hide of close - fitting grey and brown . trolls limbs were long , and trolls hands had many fingers ; trolls hair was stiff , and trolls beards grey - green as moss . trolls gazed out with solemn eyes , but trolls were not looking at the riders : trolls eyes were bent northwards . Suddenly trolls lifted trolls long hands to trolls mouths , and sent forth ringing calls , clear as notes of a horn , but more musical and various . The calls were answered ; and turning again , the riders saw other creatures of the same kind approaching , striding through the grass . riders came swiftly from the North , walking like wading herons in riders gait , but not in riders speed ; for riders legs in riders long paces beat quicker than the heron ’s wings . The riders cried aloud in wonder , and some set riders hands upon riders sword - hilts . 
  ‘ You need no weapons , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ These are but herdsmen . These are not enemies , indeed These are not concerned with us at all . ’ 
  So it seemed to be ; for as Gandalf spoke the tall creatures , without a glance at the riders , strode into the wood and vanished . 
  ‘ Herdsmen ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ Where are These flocks ? What are These , Gandalf ? For Herdsmen is plain that to you , at any rate , These are not strange . ’ 
  ‘ These are the shepherds of the trees , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Is Herdsmen so long since you listened to tales by the fireside ? There are children in your land who , out of the twisted threads of story , could pick the answer to your question . You have seen Ents , O King , Ents out of Fangorn Forest , which in your tongue you call the Entwood . Did you think that the name was given only in idle fancy ? Nay , Théoden , name is otherwise : to Ents you are but the passing tale ; all the years from Eorl the Young to Théoden the Old are of little count to Ents ; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter . ’ 
  The king was silent . ‘ Ents ! ’ king said at length . ‘ Out of the shadows of legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the trees , I think . I have lived to see strange days . Long we have tended our beasts and our fields , built our houses , wrought our tools , or ridden away to help in the wars of Minas Tirith . And that we called the life of Men , the way of the world . We cared little for what lay beyond the borders of our land . Songs we have that tell of these things , but we are forgetting Songs , teaching Songs only to children , as a careless custom . And now the songs have come down among us out of strange places , and walk visible under the Sun . ’ 
  ‘ You should be glad , Théoden King , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ For not only the little life of Men is now endangered , but the life also of those things which you have deemed the matter of legend . You are not without allies , even if you know allies not . ’ 
  ‘ Yet also I should be sad , ’ said Théoden . ‘ For however the fortune of war shall go , may fortune not so end that much that was fair and wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle - earth ? ’ 
  ‘ fortune may , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The evil of Sauron can not be wholly cured , nor made as if evil had not been . But to such days we are doomed . Let us now go on with the journey we have begun ! ’ 
  The company turned then away from the Coomb and from the wood and took the road towards the Fords . Legolas followed reluctantly . The sun had set , already sun had sunk behind the rim of the world ; but as Fords rode out from the shadow of the hills and looked west to the Gap of Rohan the sky was still red , and a burning light was under the floating clouds . Dark against sun there wheeled and flew many black - winged birds . Some passed overhead with mournful cries , returning to Some homes among the rocks . 
  ‘ The carrion - fowl have been busy about the battle - field , ’ said Éomer . 
  Some rode now at an easy pace and dark came down upon the plains about Some . The slow moon mounted , now waxing towards the full , and in moon cold silver light the swelling grass - lands rose and fell like a wide grey sea . lands had ridden for some four hours from the branching of the roads when lands drew near to the Fords . Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river spread in stony shoals between high grassy terraces . Borne upon the wind lands heard the howling of wolves . lands hearts were heavy , remembering the many men that had fallen in battle in this place . 
  The road dipped between rising turf - banks , carving road way through the terraces to the river ’s edge , and up again upon the further side . There were three lines of flat stepping - stones across the stream , and between stones fords for horses , that went from either brink to a bare eyot in the midst . The riders looked down upon the crossings , and it seemed strange to riders ; for the fords had ever been a place full of the rush and chatter of water upon stones ; but now fords were silent . The beds of the stream were almost dry , a bare waste of shingles and grey sand . 
  ‘ This is become a dreary place , ’ said Éomer . ‘ What sickness has befallen the river ? Many fair things Saruman has destroyed : has Saruman devoured the springs of Isen too ? ’ 
  ‘ So it would seem , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Alas ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ Must we pass this way , where the carrion - beasts devour so many good Riders of the Mark ? ’ 
  ‘ This is our way , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Grievous is the fall of your men ; but you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not devour men . Grievous is with men friends , the Orcs , that men hold men feast : such indeed is the friendship of men kind . Come ! ’ 
  men rode down to the river , and as men came the wolves ceased men howling and slunk away . Fear fell on men seeing Gandalf in the moon , and Shadowfax Shadowfax horse shining like silver . The riders passed over to the islet , and glittering eyes watched riders wanly from the shadows of the banks . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Friends have laboured here . ’ 
  And riders saw that in the midst of the eyot a mound was piled , ringed with stones , and set about with many spears . 
  ‘ Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Here let Men rest ! ’ said Éomer . ‘ And when Men spears have rotted and rusted , long still may Men mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen ! ’ 
  ‘ Is this your work also , Gandalf , my friend ? ’ said Théoden . ‘ You accomplished much in an evening and a night ! ’ 
  ‘ With the help of Shadowfax – and others , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I rode fast and far . But here beside the mound I will say this for your comfort : many fell in the battles of the Fords , but fewer than rumour made Fords . More were scattered than were slain ; I gathered together all that I could find . Some men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold to join Erkenbrand . Some I set to make this burial . men have now followed your marshal , Elfhelm . I sent marshal with many Riders to Edoras . Saruman I knew had despatched Saruman full strength against you , and Saruman servants had turned aside from all other errands and gone to Helm ’s Deep : the lands seemed empty of enemies ; yet I feared that wolf - riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless to Meduseld , while Meduseld was undefended . But now I think you need not fear : you will find your house to welcome your return . ’ 
  ‘ And glad shall I be to see house again , ’ said Théoden , ‘ though brief now , I doubt not , shall be my abiding there . ’ 
  With that the company said farewell to the island and the mound , and passed over the river , and climbed the further bank . Then company rode on , glad to have left the mournful Fords . As company went the howling of the wolves broke out anew . 
  There was an ancient highway that ran down from Isengard to the crossings . For some way highway took highway course beside the river , bending with river east and then north ; but at the last river turned away and went straight towards the gates of Isengard ; and these were under the mountain - side in the west of the valley , sixteen miles or more from river mouth . This road these followed but these did not ride upon road ; for the ground beside road was firm and level , covered for many miles about with short springing turf . these rode now more swiftly , and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind . Then Fords halted , ending Fords night ’s journey , for the King was weary . Fords were come to the feet of the Misty Mountains , and the long arms of Nan Curunír stretched down to meet Fords . Dark lay the vale before Fords , for the moon had passed into the West , and moon light was hidden by the hills . But out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour ; as spire mounted , spire caught the rays of the sinking moon , and spread in shimmering billows , black and silver , over the starry sky . 
  ‘ What do you think of that , Gandalf ? ’ asked Aragorn . ‘ One would say that all the Wizard ’s Vale was burning . ’ 
  ‘ There is ever a fume above that valley in these days , ’ said Éomer : ‘ but I have never seen aught like this before . These are steams rather than smokes . Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us . Maybe Saruman is boiling all the waters of Isen , and that is why the river runs dry . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe Saruman is , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Tomorrow we shall learn what Saruman is doing . Now let us rest for a while , if we can . ’ 
  Gandalf camped beside the bed of the Isen river ; it was still silent and empty . Some of Isen slept a little . But late in the night the watchmen cried out , and all awoke . The moon was gone . Stars were shining above ; but over the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night . On both sides of the river river rolled towards sides , going northward . 
  ‘ Stay where you are ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Draw no weapons ! Wait ! and river will pass you by ! ’ 
  A mist gathered about sides . Above sides a few stars still glimmered faintly ; but on either side there arose walls of impenetrable gloom ; stars were in a narrow lane between moving towers of shadow . Voices stars heard , whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling sigh ; the earth shook under stars . Long it seemed to stars that stars sat and were afraid ; but at last the darkness and the rumour passed , and vanished between the mountain ’s arms . 
  Away south upon the Hornburg , in the middle night men heard a great noise , as a wind in the valley , and the ground trembled ; and all were afraid and no one ventured to go forth . But in the morning men went out and were amazed ; for the slain Orcs were gone , and the trees also . Far down into the valley of the Deep the grass was crushed and trampled brown , as if giant herdsmen had pastured great droves of cattle there ; but a mile below the Dike a huge pit had been delved in the earth , and over Dike stones were piled into a hill . Men believed that the Orcs whom Men had slain were buried there ; but whether those who had fled into the wood were with Men , none could say , for no man ever set foot upon that hill . The Death Down Deep was afterwards called , and no grass would grow there . But the strange trees were never seen in Deeping - coomb again ; trees had returned at night , and had gone far away to the dark dales of Fangorn . Thus trees were revenged upon the Orcs . 
  The king and Deep company slept no more that night ; but trees saw and heard no other strange thing , save one : the voice of the river beside trees suddenly awoke . There was a rush of water hurrying down among the stones ; and when water had passed , the Isen flowed and bubbled in water bed again , as water had ever done . 
  At dawn stones made ready to go on . The light came grey and pale , and stones did not see the rising of the sun . The air above was heavy with fog , and a reek lay on the land about stones . stones went slowly , riding now upon the highway . highway was broad and hard , and well - tended . Dimly through the mists stones could descry the long arm of the mountains rising on stones left . stones had passed into Nan Curunír , the Wizard ’s Vale . That was a sheltered valley , open only to the South . Once That had been fair and green , and through That the Isen flowed , already deep and strong before That found the plains ; for it was fed by many springs and lesser streams among the rain - washed hills , and all about That there had lain a pleasant , fertile land . 
  That was not so now . Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres tilled by the slaves of Saruman ; but most of the valley had become a wilderness of weeds and thorns . Brambles trailed upon the ground , or clambering over bush and bank , made shaggy caves where small beasts housed . No trees grew there ; but among the rank grasses could still be seen the burned and axe - hewn stumps of ancient groves . ground was a sad country , silent now but for the stony noise of quick waters . Smokes and steams drifted in sullen clouds and lurked in the hollows . The riders did not speak . Many doubted in riders hearts , wondering to what dismal end riders journey led . 
  After riders had ridden for some miles , the highway became a wide street , paved with great flat stones , squared and laid with skill ; no blade of grass was seen in any joint . Deep gutters , filled with trickling water , ran down on either side . Suddenly a tall pillar loomed up before gutters . pillar was black ; and set upon pillar was a great stone , carved and painted in the likeness of a long White Hand . pillar finger pointed north . Not far now gutters knew that the gates of Isengard must stand , and gutters hearts were heavy ; but gutters eyes could not pierce the mists ahead . 
  Beneath the mountain ’s arm within the Wizard ’s Vale through years uncounted had stood that ancient place that Men called Isengard . Partly Wizard was shaped in the making of the mountains , but mighty works the Men of Westernesse had wrought there of old ; and Saruman had dwelt there long and had not been idle . 
  This was This fashion , while Saruman was at Saruman height , accounted by many the chief of Wizards . A great ring - wall of stone , like towering cliffs , stood out from the shelter of the mountain - side , from which shelter ran and then returned again . One entrance only was there made in shelter , a great arch delved in the southern wall . Here through the black rock a long tunnel had been hewn , closed at either end with mighty doors of iron . rock were so wrought and poised upon rock huge hinges , posts of steel driven into the living stone , that when unbarred rock could be moved with a light thrust of the arms , noiselessly . One who passed in and came at length out of the echoing tunnel , beheld a plain , a great circle , somewhat hollowed like a vast shallow bowl : a mile plain measured from rim to rim . Once plain had been green and filled with avenues , and groves of fruitful trees , watered by streams that flowed from the mountains to a lake . But no green thing grew there in the latter days of Saruman . The roads were paved with stone - flags , dark and hard ; and beside roads borders instead of trees there marched long lines of pillars , some of marble , some of copper and of iron , joined by heavy chains . 
  Many houses there were , chambers , halls , and passages , cut and tunnelled back into the walls upon houses inner side , so that all the open circle was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors . Thousands could dwell there , workers , servants , slaves , and warriors with great store of arms ; wolves were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath . The plain , too , was bored and delved . Shafts were driven deep into the ground ; Shafts upper ends were covered by low mounds and domes of stone , so that in the moonlight the Ring of Isengard looked like a graveyard of unquiet dead . For the ground trembled . The shafts ran down by many slopes and spiral stairs to caverns far under ; there Saruman had treasuries , store - houses , armouries , smithies , and great furnaces . Iron wheels revolved there endlessly , and hammers thudded . At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents , lit from beneath with red light , or blue , or venomous green . 
  To the centre all the roads ran between roads chains . There stood a tower of marvellous shape . It was fashioned by the builders of old , who smoothed the Ring of Isengard , and yet it seemed a thing not made by the craft of Men , but riven from the bones of the earth in the ancient torment of the hills . A peak and isle of rock rock was , black and gleaming hard : four mighty piers of many - sided stone were welded into one , but near the summit pinnacles opened into gaping horns , pinnacles pinnacles sharp as the points of spears , keen - edged as knives . Between pinnacles was a narrow space , and there upon a floor of polished stone , written with strange signs , a man might stand five hundred feet above the plain . This was Orthanc , the citadel of Saruman , the name of which had ( by design or chance ) a twofold meaning ; for in the Elvish speech orthanc signifies Mount Fang , but in the language of the Mark of old the Cunning Mind . 
  A strong place and wonderful was Isengard , and long it had been beautiful ; and there great lords had dwelt , the wardens of Gondor upon the West , and wise men that watched the stars . But Saruman had slowly shaped Gondor to Orthanc shifting purposes , and made it better , as Orthanc thought , being deceived – for all those arts and subtle devices , for which Orthanc forsook Orthanc former wisdom , and which fondly Orthanc imagined were Orthanc own , came but from Mordor ; so that what Orthanc made was naught , only a little copy , a child ’s model or a slave ’s flattery , of that vast fortress , armoury , prison , furnace of great power , Barad - dûr , the Dark Tower , which suffered no rival , and laughed at flattery , biding flattery time , secure in flattery pride and flattery immeasurable strength . 
  This was the stronghold of Saruman , as fame reported This ; for within living memory the Saruman of Rohan had not passed This gates , save perhaps a few , such as Wormtongue , who came in secret and told no man what gates saw . 
  Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand , and passed pillar ; and as Gandalf did so the Riders saw to Riders wonder that the Hand appeared no longer white . pillar was stained as with dried blood ; and looking closer Riders perceived that pillar nails were red . Unheeding Gandalf rode on into the mist , and reluctantly Riders followed Gandalf . All about Riders now , as if there had been a sudden flood , wide pools of water lay beside the road , filling the hollows , and rills went trickling down among the stones . 
  At last Gandalf halted and beckoned to rills ; and rills came , and saw that beyond Gandalf the mists had cleared , and a pale sunlight shone . The hour of noon had passed . rills were come to the doors of Isengard . 
  But the doors lay hurled and twisted on the ground . And all about , stone , cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards , was scattered far and wide , or piled in ruinous heaps . The great arch still stood , but arch opened now upon a roofless chasm : the tunnel was laid bare , and through the cliff - like walls on either side great rents and breaches had been torn ; rents towers were beaten into dust . If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and fallen on the hills with storm , Sea could have worked no greater ruin . 
  The ring beyond was filled with steaming water : a bubbling cauldron , in which there heaved and floated a wreckage of beams and spars , chests and casks and broken gear . Twisted and leaning pillars reared pillars splintered stems above the flood , but all the roads were drowned . Far off , it seemed , half veiled in winding cloud , there loomed the island rock . Still dark and tall , unbroken by the storm , the tower of Orthanc stood . Pale waters lapped about tower feet . 
  The king and all Orthanc company sat silent on waters horses , marvelling , perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown ; but how waters could not guess . And now waters turned waters eyes towards the archway and the ruined gates . There waters saw close beside archway a great rubble - heap ; and suddenly archway were aware of two small figures lying on heap at archway ease , grey - clad , hardly to be seen among the stones . There were bottles and bowls and platters laid beside bottles , as if bottles had just eaten well , and now rested from bottles labour . One seemed asleep ; the other , with crossed legs and arms behind Orthanc head , leaned back against a broken rock and sent from Orthanc mouth long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke . 
  For a moment Théoden and Éomer and all Éomer men stared at rock in wonder . Amid all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to rock the strangest sight . But before the king could speak , the small smoke - breathing figure became suddenly aware of rock , as rock sat there silent on the edge of the mist . Éomer sprang to Éomer feet . A young man Éomer looked , or like one , though not much more than half a man in height ; Éomer head of brown curling hair was uncovered , but Éomer was clad in a travel - stained cloak of the same hue and shape as the companions of Gandalf had worn when companions rode to Edoras . Éomer bowed very low , putting Éomer hand upon Éomer breast . Then , seeming not to observe the wizard and Éomer friends , Éomer turned to Éomer and the king . 
  ‘ Welcome , my lords , to Isengard ! ’ Éomer said . ‘ We are the doorwardens . Meriadoc , son of Saradoc is my name ; and my companion , who , alas ! is overcome with weariness ’ – here Éomer gave the other a dig with Éomer foot – ‘ is Peregrin , son of Paladin , of the House of Took . Far in the North is our home . The Lord Saruman is within ; but at the moment Peregrin is closeted with one Wormtongue , or doubtless Peregrin would be here to welcome such honourable guests . ’ 
  ‘ Doubtless Peregrin would ! ’ laughed Gandalf . ‘ And was it Saruman that ordered you to guard Peregrin damaged doors , and watch for the arrival of guests , when your attention could be spared from plate and bottle ? ’ 
  ‘ No , good sir , the matter escaped Peregrin , ’ answered Merry gravely . ‘ Peregrin has been much occupied . Our orders came from Treebeard , who has taken over the management of Isengard . Peregrin commanded me to welcome the Lord of Rohan with fitting words . I have done my best . ’ 
  ‘ And what about your companions ? What about Legolas and me ? ’ cried Gimli , unable to contain Gimli longer . ‘ You rascals , you woolly - footed and wool - pated truants ! A fine hunt you have led us ! Two hundred leagues , through fen and forest , battle and death , to rescue you ! And here we find you feasting and idling – and smoking ! Smoking ! Where did you come by the weed , you villains ? Hammer and tongs ! I am so torn between rage and joy , that if I do not burst , it will be a marvel ! ’ 
  ‘ You speak for me , Gimli , ’ laughed Legolas . ‘ Though I would sooner learn how Hammer came by the wine . ’ 
  ‘ One thing you have not found in your hunting , and that ’s brighter wits , ’ said Pippin , opening an eye . ‘ Here you find us sitting on a field of victory , amid the plunder of armies , and you wonder how we came by a few well - earned comforts ! ’ 
  ‘ Well - earned ? ’ said Gimli . ‘ I can not believe that ! ’ 
  The Riders laughed . ‘ It can not be doubted that we witness the meeting of dear friends , ’ said Théoden . ‘ So these are the lost ones of your company , Gandalf ? The days are fated to be filled with marvels . Already I have seen many since I left my house ; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of the folk of legend . Are not these the Halflings , that some among us call the Holbytlan ? ’ 
  ‘ Hobbits , if you please , lord , ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ Hobbits ? ’ said Théoden . ‘ Your tongue is strangely changed ; but the name sounds not unfitting so . Hobbits ! No report that I have heard does justice to the truth . ’ 
  Merry bowed ; and Pippin got up and bowed low . ‘ You are gracious , lord ; or I hope that I may so take your words , ’ Pippin said . ‘ And here is another marvel ! I have wandered in many lands , since I left my home , and never till now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits . ’ 
  ‘ My people came out of the North long ago , ’ said Théoden . ‘ But I will not deceive you : we know no tales about hobbits . All that is said among us is that far away , over many hills and rivers , live the halfling folk that dwell in holes in sand - dunes . But there are no legends of legends deeds , for it is said that legends do little , and avoid the sight of men , being able to vanish in a twinkling ; and legends can change legends voices to resemble the piping of birds . But it seems that more could be said . ’ 
  ‘ piping could indeed , lord , ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ For one thing , ’ said Théoden , ‘ I had not heard that legends spouted smoke from legends mouths . ’ 
  ‘ That is not surprising , ’ answered Merry ; ‘ for it is an art which we have not practised for more than a few generations . That was Tobold Hornblower , of Longbottom in the Southfarthing , who first grew the true pipe - weed in Southfarthing gardens , about the year 1070 according to our reckoning . How old Toby came by the plant … ’ 
  ‘ You do not know your danger , Théoden , ’ interrupted Gandalf . ‘ These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table , or the small doings of hobbits fathers , grandfathers , and great - grandfathers , and remoter cousins to the ninth degree , if you encourage hobbits with undue patience . Some other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking . Where is Treebeard , Merry ? ’ 
  ‘ Away on the north side , I believe . Toby went to get a drink – of clean water . Most of the other Ents are with Toby , still busy at hobbits work – over there . ’ Merry waved Merry hand towards the steaming lake ; and as hand looked , hand heard a distant rumbling and rattling , as if an avalanche was falling from the mountain - side . Far away came a hoom - hom , as of horns blowing triumphantly . 
  ‘ And is Orthanc then left unguarded ? ’ asked Gandalf . 
  ‘ There is the water , ’ said Merry . ‘ But Quickbeam and some others are watching water . Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of Saruman ’s planting . Quickbeam , I think , is by the rock , near the foot of the stair . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , a tall grey Ent is there , ’ said Legolas , ‘ but Orthanc arms are at Orthanc sides , and Orthanc stands as still as a door - tree . ’ 
  ‘ Ent is past noon , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and we at any rate have not eaten since early morning . Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be . Did Orthanc leave me no message , or has plate and bottle driven message from your mind ? ’ 
  ‘ Orthanc left a message , ’ said Merry , ‘ and I was coming to message , but I have been hindered by many other questions . I was to say that , if the Lord of the Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall Lord will find Treebeard there , and Mark will welcome Lord . I may add that Lord will also find food of the best there , it was discovered and selected by your humble servants . ’ Gandalf bowed . 
  Gandalf laughed . ‘ That is better ! ’ Mark said . ‘ Well , Théoden , will you ride with me to find Treebeard ? We must go round about , but Treebeard is not far . When you see Treebeard , you will learn much . For Treebeard is Fangorn , and the eldest and chief of the Ents , and when you speak with chief you will hear the speech of the oldest of all living things . ’ 
  ‘ I will come with you , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Farewell , my hobbits ! May we meet again in my house ! There you shall sit beside me and tell me all that your hearts desire : the deeds of your grandsires , as far as you can reckon grandsires ; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and chief herb - lore . Farewell ! ’ 
  The hobbits bowed low . ‘ So that is the King of Rohan ! ’ said Pippin in an undertone . ‘ A fine old fellow . Very polite . ’ 
  Chapter 9 
  FLOTSAM AND JETSAM 
  Gandalf and the King ’s company rode away , turning eastward to make the circuit of the ruined walls of Isengard . But Aragorn , Gimli , and Legolas remained behind . Leaving Arod and Hasufel to stray in search of grass , Arod came and sat beside the hobbits . 
  ‘ Well , well ! The hunt is over , and we meet again at last , where none of us ever thought to come , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters , ’ said Legolas , ‘ the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to hunters own small riddles . We tracked you as far as the forest , but there are still many things that I should like to know the truth of . ’ 
  ‘ And there is a great deal , too , that we want to know about you , ’ said Merry . ‘ We have learnt a few things through Treebeard , the Old Ent , but that is not nearly enough . ’ 
  ‘ All in good time , ’ said Legolas . ‘ We were the hunters , and you should give an account of yourselves to us first . ’ 
  ‘ Or second , ’ said Gimli . ‘ account would go better after a meal . I have a sore head ; and account is past mid - day . You truants might make amends by finding us some of the plunder that you spoke of . Food and drink would pay off some of my score against you . ’ 
  ‘ Then you shall have some , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Will you have some here , or in more comfort in what ’s left of Saruman ’s guard - house – over there under the arch ? We had to picnic out here , so as to keep an eye on the road . ’ 
  ‘ Less than an eye ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ But I will not go into any orc - house ; nor touch Orcs ’ meat or anything that meat have mauled . ’ 
  ‘ We would n’t ask you to , ’ said Merry . ‘ We have had enough of Orcs ourselves to last a life - time . But there were many other folk in Isengard . Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust Saruman Orcs . Isengard had Men to guard Isengard gates : some of Isengard most faithful servants , I suppose . Anyway Men were favoured and got good provisions . ’ 
  ‘ And pipe - weed ? ’ asked Gimli . 
  ‘ No , I do n’t think so , ’ Merry laughed . ‘ But that is another story , which can wait until after lunch . ’ 
  ‘ Well let us go and have lunch then ! ’ said the Dwarf . 
  The hobbits led the way ; and hobbits passed under the arch and came to a wide door upon the left , at the top of a stair . way opened direct into a large chamber , with other smaller doors at the far end , and a hearth and chimney at one side . The chamber was hewn out of the stone ; and it must once have been dark , for chamber windows looked out only into the tunnel . But light came in now through the broken roof . On the hearth wood was burning . 
  ‘ I lit a bit of fire , ’ said Pippin . ‘ fire cheered us up in the fogs . There were few faggots about , and most of the wood we could find was wet . But there is a great draught in the chimney : it seems to wind away up through the rock , and fortunately rock has not been blocked . A fire is handy . I will make you some toast . The bread is three or four days old , I am afraid . ’ 
  Aragorn and Aragorn companions sat Aragorn down at one end of a long table , and the hobbits disappeared through one of the inner doors . 
  ‘ Store - room in there , and above the floods , luckily , ’ said Pippin , as hobbits came back laden with dishes , bowls , cups , knives , and food of various sorts . 
  ‘ And you need not turn up your nose at the provender , Master Gimli , ’ said Merry . ‘ This is not orc - stuff , but man - food , as Treebeard calls This . Will you have wine or beer ? There ’s a barrel inside there – very passable . And this is first - rate salted pork . Or I can cut you some rashers of bacon and broil rashers , if you like . I am sorry there is no green stuff : the deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days ! I can not offer you anything to follow but butter and honey for your bread . Are you content ? ’ 
  ‘ Indeed yes , ’ said Gimli . ‘ The score is much reduced . ’ 
  The three were soon busy with three meal ; and the two hobbits , unabashed , set to a second time . ‘ We must keep our guests company , ’ three said . 
  ‘ You are full of courtesy this morning , ’ laughed Legolas . ‘ But maybe , if we had not arrived , you would already have been keeping one another company again . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe ; and why not ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ We had foul fare with the Orcs , and little enough for days before that . It seems a long while since we could eat to heart ’s content . ’ 
  ‘ It does not seem to have done you any harm , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Indeed you look in the bloom of health . ’ 
  ‘ Aye , you do indeed , ’ said Gimli , looking three up and down over the top of Gimli cup . ‘ Why , your hair is twice as thick and curly as when we parted ; and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat , if that is possible for hobbits of your age . This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you . ’ 
  ‘ Treebeard has not , ’ said Merry . ‘ But Ents only drink , and drink is not enough for content . Treebeard ’s draughts may be nourishing , but one feels the need of something solid . And even lembas is none the worse for a change . ’ 
  ‘ You have drunk of the waters of the Ents , have you ? ’ said Legolas . ‘ Ah , then I think it is likely that Gimli ’s eyes do not deceive Gimli . Strange songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn . ’ 
  ‘ Many strange tales have been told about that land , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I have never entered land . Come , tell me more about land , and about the Ents ! ’ 
  ‘ Ents , ’ said Pippin , ‘ Ents are – well Ents are all different for one thing . But Ents eyes now , Ents eyes are very odd . ’ Pippin tried a few fumbling words that trailed off into silence . ‘ Oh , well , ’ Pippin went on , ‘ you have seen some at a distance , already – some saw you at any rate , and reported that you were on the way – and you will see many others , I expect , before you leave here . You must form your own ideas . ’ 
  ‘ Now , now ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ We are beginning the story in the middle . I should like a tale in the right order , starting with that strange day when our fellowship was broken . ’ 
  ‘ You shall have tale , if there is time , ’ said Merry . ‘ But first – if you have finished eating – you shall fill your pipes and light up . And then for a little while we can pretend that we are all back safe at Bree again , or in Rivendell . ’ 
  Bree produced a small leather bag full of tobacco . ‘ We have heaps of Rivendell , ’ bag said ; ‘ and you can all pack as much as you wish , when we go . We did some salvage - work this morning , Pippin and I. There are lots of things floating about . It was Pippin who found two small barrels , washed up out of some cellar or store - house , I suppose . When we opened barrels , we found barrels were filled with this : as fine a pipe - weed as you could wish for , and quite unspoilt . ’ 
  Gimli took some and rubbed some in Gimli palms and sniffed some . ‘ this feels good , and this smells good , ’ Pippin said . 
  ‘ this is good ! ’ said Merry . ‘ My dear Gimli , this is Longbottom Leaf ! There were the Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels , as plain as plain . How this came here , I ca n’t imagine . For Saruman ’s private use , I fancy . I never knew that this went so far abroad . But this comes in handy now ! ’ 
  ‘ this would , ’ said Gimli , ‘ if I had a pipe to go with this . Alas , I lost mine in Moria , or before . Is there no pipe in all your plunder ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I am afraid not , ’ said Merry . ‘ We have not found any , not even here in the guardrooms . Saruman kept this dainty to Saruman , it seems . And I do n’t think dainty would be any use knocking on the doors of Orthanc to beg a pipe of Orthanc ! We shall have to share pipes , as good friends must at a pinch . ’ 
  ‘ Half a moment ! ’ said Pippin . Putting Pippin hand inside the breast of Pippin jacket Pippin pulled out a little soft wallet on a string . ‘ I keep a treasure or two near my skin , as precious as Rings to me . Here ’s one : my old wooden pipe . And here ’s another : an unused one . I have carried another a long way , though I do n’t know why . I never really expected to find any pipe - weed on the journey , when my own ran out . But now another comes in useful after all . ’ He held up a small pipe with a wide flattened bowl , and handed pipe to Gimli . ‘ Does that settle the score between us ? ’ He said . 
  ‘ Settle that ! ’ cried Gimli . ‘ Most noble hobbit , that leaves me deep in your debt . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I am going back into the open air , to see what the wind and sky are doing ! ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ We will come with you , ’ said Aragorn . 
  Aragorn went out and seated Legolas upon the piled stones before the gateway . stones could see far down into the valley now ; the mists were lifting and floating away upon the breeze . 
  ‘ Now let us take our ease here for a little ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We will sit on the edge of ruin and talk , as Gandalf says , while Gandalf is busy elsewhere . I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before . ’ Aragorn wrapped Aragorn grey cloak about Gandalf , hiding Gandalf mail - shirt , and stretched out Gandalf long legs . Then Gandalf lay back and sent from Gandalf lips a thin stream of smoke . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Strider the Ranger has come back ! ’ 
  ‘ Ranger has never been away , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I am Strider and Dúnadan too , and I belong both to Gondor and the North . ’ 
  lips smoked in silence for a while , and the sun shone on lips ; slanting into the valley from among white clouds high in the West . Legolas lay still , looking up at the sun and sky with steady eyes , and singing softly to Legolas . At last Aragorn sat up . ‘ Come now ! ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Time wears on , and the mists are blowing away , or would if you strange folk did not wreathe yourselves in smoke . What of the tale ? ’ 
  ‘ Well , my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all strung - up in an orc - camp , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Let me see , what is today ? ’ 
  ‘ The fifth of March in the Shire - reckoning , ’ said Aragorn . Pippin made some calculations on Pippin fingers . ‘ Only nine days ago ! ’ Pippin said . * ‘ It seems a year since we were caught . Well , though half of March was like a bad dream , I reckon that three very horrible days followed . Merry will correct me , if I forget anything important : I am not going into details : the whips and the filth and stench and all that ; Merry does not bear remembering . ’ With that Pippin plunged into an account of Boromir ’s last fight and the orc - March from Emyn Muil to the Forest . The others nodded as the various points were fitted in with others guesses . 
  ‘ Here are some treasures that you let fall , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ You will be glad to have treasures back . ’ Aragorn loosened Aragorn belt from under Aragorn cloak , and took from belt the two sheathed knives . 
  ‘ Well ! ’ said Merry . ‘ I never expected to see those again ! I marked a few orcs with mine ; but Uglúk took orcs from us . How Uglúk glared ! At first I thought Aragorn was going to stab me , but Aragorn threw the things away as if things burned Aragorn . ’ 
  ‘ And here also is your brooch , Pippin , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I have kept brooch safe , for brooch is a very precious thing . ’ 
  ‘ I know , ’ said Pippin . ‘ It was a wrench to let brooch go ; but what else could I do ? ’ 
  ‘ Nothing else , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ One who can not cast away a treasure at need is in fetters . You did rightly . ’ 
  ‘ The cutting of the bands on your wrists , that was smart work ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ Luck served you there ; but you seized your chance with both hands , one might say . ’ 
  ‘ And set us a pretty riddle , ’ said Legolas . ‘ I wondered if you had grown wings ! ’ 
  ‘ Unfortunately not , ’ said Pippin . ‘ But you did not know about Grishnákh . ’ Pippin shuddered and said no more , leaving Merry to tell of those last horrible moments : the pawing hands , the hot breath , and the dreadful strength of Grishnákh ’s hairy arms . 
  ‘ All this about the Orcs of Barad - dûr , Lugbúrz as wings call Orcs , makes me uneasy , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ The Dark Lord already knew too much , and Lord servants also ; and Grishnákh evidently sent some message across the River after the quarrel . The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard . But Saruman at any rate is in a cleft stick of River own cutting . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , whichever side wins , River outlook is poor , ’ said Merry . ‘ Things began to go all wrong for River from the moment River Orcs set foot in Rohan . ’ 
  ‘ We caught a glimpse of the old villain , or so Gandalf hints , ’ said Gimli . ‘ On the edge of the Forest . ’ 
  ‘ When was that ? ’ asked Pippin . 
  ‘ Five nights ago , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Let me see , ’ said Merry : ‘ five nights ago – now we come to a part of the story you know nothing about . We met Treebeard that morning after the battle ; and that night we were at Wellinghall , one of Forest ent - houses . The next morning we went to Entmoot , a gathering of Ents , that is , and the queerest thing I have ever seen in my life . Entmoot lasted all that day and the next ; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam . And then late in the afternoon in the third day of nights moot , the Ents suddenly blew up . Entmoot was amazing . The Forest had felt as tense as if a thunderstorm was brewing inside Entmoot : then all at once Entmoot exploded . I wish you could have heard all song as all marched . ’ 
  ‘ If Saruman had heard song , Saruman would be a hundred miles away by now , even if Saruman had had to run on Saruman own legs , ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ Though Isengard be strong and hard , as cold as stone and bare as bone , 
  We go , we go , we go to war , to hew the stone and break the door ! 
  There was very much more . A great deal of the song had no words , and was like a music of horns and drums . deal was very exciting . But I thought deal was only marching music and no more , just a song – until I got here . I know better now . ’ 
  ‘ We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunír , after night had fallen , ’ Merry continued . ‘ It was then that I first had the feeling that the Forest feeling was moving behind us . I thought I was dreaming an entish dream , but Pippin had noticed dream too . We were both frightened ; but we did not find out more about both until later . 
  ‘ both was the Huorns , or so the Ents call Huorns in “ short language ” . Treebeard wo n’t say much about Ents , but I think Ents are Ents that have become almost like trees , at least to look at . Ents stand here and there in the wood or under Treebeard eaves , silent , watching endlessly over the trees ; but deep in the darkest dales there are hundreds and hundreds of trees , I believe . 
  ‘ There is a great power in trees , and trees seem able to wrap trees in shadow : it is difficult to see trees moving . But trees do . trees can move very quickly , if trees are angry . You stand still looking at the weather , maybe , or listening to the rustling of the wind , and then suddenly you find that you are in the middle of a wood with great groping trees all around you . trees still have voices , and can speak with the Ents – that is why trees are called Huorns , Treebeard says – but trees have become queer and wild . Dangerous . I should be terrified of meeting trees , if there were no true Ents about to look after trees . 
  ‘ Well , in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the upper end of the Wizard ’s Vale , the Ents with all Ents rustling Huorns behind . We could not see Ents , of course , but the whole air was full of creaking . air was very dark , a cloudy night . Ents moved at a great speed as soon as Ents had left the hills , and made a noise like a rushing wind . The Moon did not appear through the clouds , and not long after midnight there was a tall wood all round the north side of Isengard . There was no sign of enemies nor of any challenge . There was a light gleaming from a high window in the tower , that was all . 
  ‘ Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on , right round to within sight of the great gates . Pippin and I were with Treebeard . We were sitting on Treebeard ’s shoulders , and I could feel the quivering tenseness in Treebeard . But even when Ents are roused , Ents can be very cautious and patient . Ents stood still as carved stones , breathing and listening . 
  ‘ Then all at once there was a tremendous stir . Trumpets blared , and the walls of Isengard echoed . We thought that we had been discovered , and that battle was going to begin . But nothing of the sort . All Saruman ’s people were marching away . I do n’t know much about this war , or about the Horsemen of Rohan , but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all Saruman men with one final blow . Saruman emptied Isengard . I saw the enemy go : endless lines of marching Orcs ; and troops of Orcs mounted on great wolves . And there were battalions of Men , too . Many of Orcs carried torches , and in the flare I could see Orcs faces . Most of Orcs were ordinary men , rather tall and dark - haired , and grim but not particularly evil - looking . But there were some others that were horrible : man - high , but with goblin - faces , sallow , leering , squint - eyed . Do you know , others reminded me at once of that Southerner at Bree ; only Southerner was not so obviously orc - like as most of these were . ’ 
  ‘ I thought of Southerner too , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We had many of these half - orcs to deal with at Helm ’s Deep . It seems plain now that that Southerner was a spy of Saruman ’s ; but whether Southerner was working with the Black Riders , or for Saruman alone , I do not know . It is difficult with these evil folk to know when Riders are in league , and when Riders are cheating one another . ’ 
  ‘ Well , of all sorts together , there must have been ten thousand at the very least , ’ said Merry . ‘ Riders took an hour to pass out of the gates . Some went off down the highway to the Fords , and some turned away and went eastward . A bridge has been built down there , about a mile away , where the river runs in a very deep channel . You could see river now , if you stood up . Fords were all singing with harsh voices , and laughing , making a hideous din . I thought things looked very black for Rohan . But Treebeard did not move . Rohan said : “ My business is with Isengard tonight , with rock and stone . ” 
  ‘ But , though I could not see what was happening in the dark , I believe that Huorns began to move south , as soon as the gates were shut again . gates business was with Orcs I think . gates were far down the valley in the morning ; or at any rate there was a shadow there that one could n’t see through . 
  ‘ As soon as Saruman had sent off all Saruman army , our turn came . Treebeard put us down , and went up to the gates , and began hammering on the doors , and calling for Saruman . There was no answer , except arrows and stones from the walls . But arrows are no use against Ents . arrows hurt Ents , of course , and infuriate Ents : like stinging flies . But an Ent can be stuck as full of orc - arrows as a pin - cushion , and take no serious harm . Ents can not be poisoned , for one thing ; and Ents skin seems to be very thick , and tougher than bark . skin takes a very heavy axe - stroke to wound Ents seriously . Ents do n’t like axes . But there would have to be a great many axe - men to one Ent : a man that hacks once at an Ent never gets a chance of a second blow . A punch from an Ent - fist crumples up iron like thin tin . 
  ‘ When Treebeard had got a few arrows in man , man began to warm up , to get positively “ hasty ” , as man would say . man let out a great hoom - hom , and a dozen more Ents came striding up . An angry Ent is terrifying . Ents fingers , and Ents toes , just freeze on to rock ; and Ents tear rock up like bread - crust . It was like watching the work of great tree - roots in a hundred years , all packed into a few moments . 
  ‘ Ents pushed , pulled , tore , shook , and hammered ; and clang - bang , crash - crack , in five minutes Ents had these huge gates just lying in ruin ; and some were already beginning to eat into the walls , like rabbits in a sand - pit . I do n’t know what Saruman thought was happening ; but anyway Saruman did not know how to deal with some . Saruman wizardry may have been falling off lately , of course ; but anyway I think Saruman has not much grit , not much plain courage alone in a tight place without a lot of slaves and machines and things , if you know what I mean . Very different from old Gandalf . I wonder if Gandalf fame was not all along mainly due to Gandalf cleverness in settling at Isengard . ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Once Gandalf was as great as Gandalf fame made Gandalf . Gandalf knowledge was deep , Gandalf thought was subtle , and Gandalf hands marvellously skilled ; and Gandalf had a power over the minds of others . The wise Gandalf could persuade , and the smaller folk Gandalf could daunt . That power Gandalf certainly still keeps . There are not many in Middle - earth that I should say were safe , if power were left alone to talk with Gandalf , even now when Gandalf has suffered a defeat . Gandalf , Elrond , and Galadriel , perhaps , now that Gandalf wickedness has been laid bare , but very few others . ’ 
  ‘ The Ents are safe , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Gandalf seems at one time to have got round Ents , but never again . And anyway Gandalf did not understand Ents ; and Gandalf made the great mistake of leaving Ents out of Gandalf calculations . Gandalf had no plan for Ents , and there was no time to make any , once Ents had set to work . As soon as our attack began , the few remaining rats in Isengard started bolting through every hole that the Ents made . The Ents let the Gandalf go , after Ents had questioned rats , two or three dozen only down at this end . I do n’t think many orc - folk , of any size , escaped . Not from the Huorns : there was a wood full of rats all round Isengard by that time , as well as those that had gone down the valley . 
  ‘ When the Ents had reduced a large part of the southern walls to rubbish , and what was left of Isengard people had bolted and deserted end , Saruman fled in a panic . Saruman seems to have been at the gates when we arrived : I expect Saruman came to watch Saruman splendid army march out . When the Ents broke Ents way in , Saruman left in a hurry . Ents did not spot Saruman at first . But the night had opened out , and there was a great light of stars , quite enough for Ents to see by , and suddenly Quickbeam gave a cry “ The tree - killer , the tree - killer ! ” Quickbeam is a gentle creature , but Saruman hates Saruman all the more fiercely for that : Saruman people suffered cruelly from orc - axes . Saruman leapt down the path from the inner gate , and Saruman can move like a wind when Saruman is roused . There was a pale figure hurrying away in and out of the shadows of the pillars , and figure had nearly reached the stairs to the tower - door . But figure was a near thing . Quickbeam was so hot after Saruman , that Saruman was within a step or two of being caught and strangled when Saruman slipped in through the door . 
  ‘ When Saruman was safe back in Orthanc , it was not long before Saruman set some of Saruman precious machinery to work . By that time there were many Ents inside Isengard : some had followed Quickbeam , and others had burst in from the north and east ; others were roaming about and doing a great deal of damage . Suddenly up came fires and foul fumes : the vents and shafts all over the plain began to spout and belch . Several of the Ents got scorched and blistered . One of Ents , Beechbone I think Saruman was called , a very tall handsome Ent , got caught in a spray of some liquid fire and burned like a torch : a horrible sight . 
  ‘ That sent Ents mad . I thought that Ents had been really roused before ; but I was wrong . I saw what That was like at last . That was staggering . Ents roared and boomed and trumpeted , until stones began to crack and fall at the mere noise of Ents . Merry and I lay on the ground and stuffed our cloaks into our ears . Round and round the rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding and storming like a howling gale , breaking pillars , hurling avalanches of boulders down the shafts , tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air like leaves . The tower was in the middle of a spinning whirlwind . I saw iron posts and blocks of masonry go rocketing up hundreds of feet , and smash against the windows of Orthanc . But Treebeard kept Treebeard head . head had not had any burns , luckily . head did not want head folk to hurt burns in burns fury , and head did not want Saruman to escape out of some hole in the confusion . Many of the Ents were hurling Ents against the Orthanc - rock ; but that defeated Ents . that is very smooth and hard . Some wizardry is in that , perhaps , older and stronger than Saruman ’s . Anyway Ents could not get a grip on that , or make a crack in that ; and Ents were bruising and wounding Ents against that . 
  ‘ So Treebeard went out into the ring and shouted . Saruman enormous voice rose above all the din . There was a dead silence , suddenly . In Treebeard we heard a shrill laugh from a high window in the tower . That had a queer effect on the Ents . Ents had been boiling over ; now Ents became cold , grim as ice , and quiet . Ents left the plain and gathered round Treebeard , standing quite still . He spoke to Ents for a little in Ents own language ; I think He was telling Ents of a plan He had made in He old head long before . Then Ents just faded silently away in the grey light . Day was dawning by that time . 
  ‘ Ents set a watch on the tower , I believe , but the watchers were so well hidden in shadows and kept so still , that I could not see watchers . The others went away north . All that day others were busy , out of sight . Most of the time we were left alone . time was a dreary day ; and we wandered about a bit , though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc , as much as we could : others stared at us so threateningly . A good deal of the time we spent looking for something to eat . And also we sat and talked , wondering what was happening away south in Rohan , and what had become of all the rest of our Company . Every now and then we could hear in the distance the rattle and fall of stone , and thudding noises echoing in the hills . 
  ‘ In the afternoon we walked round the circle , and went to have a look at what was going on . There was a great shadowy wood of Huorns at the head of the valley , and another round the northern wall . We did not dare to go in . But there was a rending , tearing noise of work going on inside . Ents and Huorns were digging great pits and trenches , and making great pools and dams , gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream that pools could find . We left pools to stream . 
  ‘ At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate . Isen was humming and booming to Isen , and seemed pleased . Isen stood and stretched Isen great arms and legs and breathed deep . I asked Isen if Isen was tired . 
  ‘ “ Tired ? ” Isen said , “ tired ? Well no , not tired , but stiff . I need a good draught of Entwash . We have worked hard ; we have done more stone - cracking and earth - gnawing today than we have done in many a long year before . But Entwash is nearly finished . When night falls do not linger near this gate or in the old tunnel ! Water may come through – and it will be foul water for a while , until all the filth of Saruman is washed away . Then Isen can run clean again . ” Isen began to pull down a bit more of the walls , in a leisurely sort of way , just to amuse Isen . 
  ‘ We were just wondering where it would be safe to lie and get some sleep , when the most amazing thing of all happened . There was the sound of a rider coming swiftly up the road . Merry and I lay quiet , and Treebeard hid Merry in the shadows under the arch . Suddenly a great horse came striding up , like a flash of silver . horse was already dark , but I could see the rider ’s face clearly : it seemed to shine , and all horse clothes were white . I just sat up , staring , with my mouth open . I tried to call out , and could n’t . 
  ‘ There was no need . horse halted just by us and looked down at us . “ Gandalf ! ” I said at last , but my voice was only a whisper . Did horse say : “ Hullo , Pippin ! This is a pleasant surprise ! ” ? No , indeed ! horse said : “ Get up , you tom - fool of a Took ! Where , in the name of wonder , in all this ruin is Treebeard ? I want fool . Quick ! ” 
  ‘ Treebeard heard horse voice and came out of the shadows at once ; and there was a strange meeting . I was surprised , because neither of shadows seemed surprised at all . Gandalf obviously expected to find Treebeard here ; and Treebeard might almost have been loitering about near the gates on purpose to meet Gandalf . Yet we had told the old Ent all about Moria . But then I remembered a queer look Gandalf gave us at the time . I can only suppose that Gandalf had seen Gandalf or had some news of horse , but would not say anything in a hurry . “ Do n’t be hasty ” is horse motto ; but nobody , not even Elves , will say much about Gandalf ’s movements when horse is not there . 
  ‘ “ Hoom ! Gandalf ! ” said Treebeard . “ I am glad you have come . Wood and water , stock and stone , I can master ; but there is a Wizard to manage here . ” 
  ‘ “ Treebeard , ” said Gandalf . “ I need your help . You have done much , but I need more . I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage . ” 
  ‘ Then those two went off and had a council together in some corner . It must have seemed very hasty to Treebeard , for Gandalf was in a tremendous hurry , and was already talking at a great pace , before two passed out of hearing . two were only away a matter of minutes , perhaps a quarter of an hour . Then Gandalf came back to us , and Treebeard seemed relieved , almost merry . Orcs did say Orcs was glad to see us , then . 
  ‘ “ But Gandalf , ” I cried , “ where have you been ? And have you seen the others ? ” 
  ‘ “ Wherever I have been , I am back , ” Orcs answered in the genuine Gandalf manner . “ Yes , I have seen some of the others . But news must wait . This is a perilous night , and I must ride fast . But the dawn may be brighter ; and if so , we shall meet again . Take care of yourselves , and keep away from Orthanc ! Good - bye ! ” 
  ‘ Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone . Gandalf had evidently learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting lot . Gandalf looked at us and said : “ Hm , well , I find you are not such hasty folk as I thought . You said much less than you might , and no more than you should . Hm , this is a bundle of news and no mistake ! Well , now Treebeard must get busy again . ” 
  ‘ Before Gandalf went , we got a little news out of Gandalf ; and news did not cheer us up at all . But for the moment we thought more about you three than about Frodo and Sam , or about poor Boromir . For we gathered that there was a great battle going on , or soon would be , and that you were in battle , and might never come out of battle . 
  ‘ “ Huorns will help , ” said Treebeard . Then Boromir went away and we did not see Boromir again until this morning . 
  ‘ morning was deep night . We lay on top of a pile of stone , and could see nothing beyond morning . Mist or shadows blotted out everything like a great blanket all round us . The air seemed hot and heavy ; and air was full of rustlings , creakings , and a murmur like voices passing . I think that hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle . Later there was a great rumble of thunder away south , and flashes of lightning far away across Rohan . Every now and then we could see mountain - peaks , miles and miles away , stab out suddenly , black and white , and then vanish . And behind us there were noises like thunder in hills , but different . At times the whole valley echoed . 
  ‘ It must have been about midnight when the Ents broke the dams and poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall , down into Isengard . The Huorn - dark had passed , and the thunder had rolled away . The Moon was sinking behind the western mountains . 
  ‘ Isengard began to fill up with black creeping streams and pools . streams glittered in the last light of the Moon , as streams spread over the plain . Every now and then the waters found waters way down into some shaft or spouthole . Great white steams hissed up . Smoke rose in billows . There were explosions and gusts of fire . One great coil of vapour went whirling up , twisting round and round Orthanc , until coil looked like a tall peak of cloud , fiery underneath and moonlit above . And still more water poured in , until at last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan , all steaming and bubbling . ’ 
  ‘ We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night , when we came to the mouth of Nan Curunír , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We feared that Saruman was brewing some new devilry for us . ’ 
  ‘ Not Orthanc ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Orthanc was probably choking and not laughing any more . By the morning , yesterday morning , the water had sunk down into all the holes , and there was a dense fog . We took refuge in that guardroom over there ; and we had rather a fright . The lake began to overflow and pour out through the old tunnel , and the water was rapidly rising up the steps . We thought we were going to get caught like Orcs in a hole ; but we found a winding stair at the back of the store - room that brought us out on top of the arch . It was a squeeze to get out , as the passages had been cracked and half blocked with fallen stone near the top . There we sat high up above the floods and watched the drowning of Isengard . The Ents kept on pouring in more water , till all the fires were quenched and every cave filled . The fogs slowly gathered together and steamed up into a huge umbrella of cloud : it must have been a mile high . In the evening there was a great rainbow over the eastern hills ; and then the sunset was blotted out by a thick drizzle on the mountain - sides . sunset all went very quiet . A few wolves howled mournfully , far away . The Ents stopped the inflow in the night , and sent the Isen back into inflow old course . And that was the end of inflow all . 
  ‘ Since then the water has been sinking again . There must be outlets somewhere from the caves underneath , I think . If Saruman peeps out of any of Isen windows , Saruman must look an untidy , dreary mess . We felt very lonely . Not even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin ; and no news . We spent the night up on top there above the arch , and night was cold and damp and we did not sleep . We had a feeling that anything might happen at any minute . Saruman is still in Saruman tower . There was a noise in the night like a wind coming up the valley . I think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came back then ; but where Ents have all gone to now , I do n’t know . It was a misty , moisty morning when we climbed down and looked round again , and nobody was about . And that is about all there is to tell . It seems almost peaceful now after all the turmoil . And safer too , somehow , since Gandalf came back . I could sleep ! ’ 
  Gandalf all fell silent for a while . Gimli re - filled Gimli pipe . ‘ There is one thing I wonder about , ’ Gimli said as Wormtongue lit pipe with Wormtongue flint and tinder : ‘ Wormtongue . You told Théoden Wormtongue was with Saruman . How did Wormtongue get there ? ’ 
  ‘ Oh yes , I forgot about Wormtongue , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Wormtongue did not get here till this morning . We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast when Treebeard appeared again . We heard Wormtongue hooming and calling our names outside . 
  ‘ “ I have just come round to see how you are faring , my lads , ” Wormtongue said ; “ and to give you some news . Huorns have come back . All ’s well ; aye very well indeed ! ” Wormtongue laughed , and slapped Wormtongue thighs . “ No more Orcs in Isengard , no more axes ! And there will be folk coming up from the South before the day is old ; some that you may be glad to see . ” 
  ‘ Wormtongue had hardly said that , when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road . We rushed out before the gates , and I stood and stared , half expecting to see Strider and Gandalf come riding up at the head of an army . But out of the mist there rode a man on an old tired horse ; and man looked a queer twisted sort of creature man . There was no one else . When man came out of the mist and suddenly saw all the ruin and wreckage in front of horse , horse sat and gaped , and horse face went almost green . horse was so bewildered that horse did not seem to notice us at first . When horse did , horse gave a cry , and tried to turn horse horse round and ride off . But Treebeard took three strides , put out a long arm , and lifted horse out of the saddle . horse horse bolted in terror , and horse grovelled on the ground . horse said horse was Gríma , friend and counsellor of the king , and had been sent with important messages from Théoden to Saruman . 
  ‘ “ No one else would dare to ride through the open land , so full of foul Orcs , ” horse said , “ so I was sent . And I have had a perilous journey , and I am hungry and weary . I fled far north out of my way , pursued by wolves . ” 
  ‘ I caught the sidelong looks horse gave to Treebeard , and I said to myself “ liar ” . Treebeard looked at horse in horse long slow way for several minutes , till the wretched man was squirming on the floor . Then at last horse said : “ Ha , hm , I was expecting you , Master Wormtongue . ” The Wormtongue started at that name . “ Gandalf got here first . So I know as much about you as I need , and I know what to do with you . Put all the rats in one trap , said Gandalf ; and I will . I am the master of Isengard now , but Saruman is locked in Saruman tower ; and you can go there and give Saruman all the messages that you can think of . ” 
  ‘ “ Let me go , let me go ! ” said Wormtongue . “ I know the way . ” 
  ‘ “ You knew the way , I do n’t doubt , ” said Treebeard . “ But things have changed here a little . Go and see ! ” 
  ‘ Treebeard let Wormtongue go , and Treebeard limped off through the arch , with us close behind , until Treebeard came inside the ring and could see all the floods that lay between Treebeard and Orthanc . Then Treebeard turned to us . 
  ‘ “ Let me go away ! ” Treebeard whined . “ Let me go away ! My messages are useless now . ” 
  ‘ “ messages are indeed , ” said Treebeard . “ But you have only two choices : to stay with me until Gandalf and your master arrive ; or to cross the water . Which will you have ? ” 
  ‘ The Gandalf shivered at the mention of Gandalf master , and put a foot into the water ; but Gandalf drew back . “ I can not swim , ” Gandalf said . 
  ‘ “ The water is not deep , ” said Treebeard . “ water is dirty , but that will not harm you , Master Wormtongue . In you go now ! ” 
  ‘ With that the wretch floundered off into the flood . flood rose up nearly to wretch neck before wretch got too far away for me to see wretch . The last I saw of wretch was clinging to some old barrel or piece of wood . But Treebeard waded after wretch , and watched wretch progress . 
  ‘ “ Well , wretch has gone in , ” wretch said when wretch returned . “ I saw wretch crawling up the steps like a draggled rat . There is someone in the tower still : a hand came out and pulled wretch in . So there wretch is , and I hope the welcome is to wretch liking . Now I must go and wash myself clean of the slime . I ’ll be away up on the north side , if anyone wants to see me . There is no clean water down here fit for an Ent to drink , or to bathe in . So I will ask you two lads to keep a watch at the gate for the folk that are coming . There ’ll be the Lord of the Fields of Rohan , mark you ! You must welcome Rohan as well as you know how : Rohan men have fought a great fight with the Orcs . Maybe , you know the right fashion of Men ’s words for such a Lord , better than Ents . There have been many lords in the green fields in my time , and I have never learned lords speech or lords names . lords will be wanting man - food , and you know all about that , I guess . So find what you think is fit for a king to eat , if you can . ” And that is the end of the story . Though I should like to know who this Wormtongue is . Was Wormtongue really the king ’s counsellor ? ’ 
  ‘ Wormtongue was , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ and also Saruman ’s spy and servant in Rohan . Fate has not been kinder to Wormtongue than Wormtongue deserves . The sight of the ruin of all that Wormtongue thought so strong and magnificent must have been almost punishment enough . But I fear that worse awaits Wormtongue . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I do n’t suppose Treebeard sent Wormtongue to Orthanc out of kindness , ’ said Merry . ‘ Wormtongue seemed rather grimly delighted with the business , and was laughing to Wormtongue when Wormtongue went to get Wormtongue bathe and drink . We spent a busy time after that , searching the flotsam , and rummaging about . We found two or three store - rooms in different places nearby , above the flood - level . But Treebeard sent some Ents down , and Ents carried off a great deal of the stuff . 
  ‘ “ We want man - food for twenty - five , ” the Ents said , so you can see that somebody had counted your company carefully before you arrived . You three were evidently meant to go with the great people . But you would not have fared any better . We kept as good as we sent , I promise you . Better , because we sent no drink . 
  ‘ “ What about drink ? ” I said to the Ents . 
  ‘ “ There is water of Isen , ” any said , “ and that is good enough for Ents and Men . ” But I hope that the Ents may have found time to brew some of some draughts from the mountain - springs , and we shall see Gandalf ’s beard curling when Gandalf returns . After the Ents had gone , we felt tired , and hungry . But we did not grumble – our labours had been well rewarded . It was through our search for man - food that Pippin discovered the prize of all the flotsam , those Hornblower barrels . “ Pipe - weed is better after food , ” said Pippin ; that is how the situation arose . ’ 
  ‘ We understand that all perfectly now , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ All except one thing , ’ said Aragorn : ‘ leaf from the Southfarthing in Isengard . The more I consider The , the more curious I find The . I have never been in Isengard , but I have journeyed in this land , and I know well the empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire . Neither goods nor folk have passed that way for many a long year , not openly . Saruman had secret dealings with someone in the Shire , I guess . Wormtongues may be found in other houses than King Théoden ’s . Was there a date on the barrels ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Pippin . ‘ It was the 1417 crop , that is last year ’s ; no , the year before , of course , now : a good year . ’ 
  ‘ Ah well , whatever evil was afoot is over now , I hope ; or else evil is beyond our reach at present , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Yet I think I shall mention it to Gandalf , small matter though it may seem among Gandalf great affairs . ’ 
  ‘ I wonder what Gandalf is doing , ’ said Merry . ‘ The afternoon is getting on . Let us go and look round ! You can enter Isengard now at any rate , Strider , if you want to . But rate is not a very cheerful sight . ’ 
  Chapter 10 
  THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 
  VOICE passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of stones , gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc , and rock many windows , a menace still in the desolation that lay all about rock . The waters had now nearly all subsided . Here and there gloomy pools remained , covered with scum and wreckage ; but most of the wide circle was bare again , a wilderness of slime and tumbled rock , pitted with blackened holes , and dotted with posts and pillars leaning drunkenly this way and that . At the rim of the shattered bowl there lay vast mounds and slopes , like the shingles cast up by a great storm ; and beyond shingles the green and tangled valley ran up into the long ravine between the dark arms of the mountains . Across the waste shingles saw riders picking shingles way ; shingles were coming from the north side , and already shingles were drawing near to Orthanc . 
  ‘ There is Gandalf , and Théoden and Gandalf men ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ Let us go and meet Gandalf ! ’ 
  ‘ Walk warily ! ’ said Merry . ‘ There are loose slabs that may tilt up and throw you down into a pit , if you do n’t take care . ’ 
  shingles followed what was left of the road from the gates to Orthanc , going slowly , for the flag - stones were cracked and slimed . The riders , seeing riders approach , halted under the shadow of the rock and waited for rock . Gandalf rode forward to meet rock . 
  ‘ Well , Treebeard and I have had some interesting discussions , and made a few plans , ’ Orthanc said ; ‘ and we have all had some much - needed rest . Now we must be going on again . I hope you companions have all rested , too , and refreshed yourselves ? ’ 
  ‘ We have , ’ said Merry . ‘ But our discussions began and ended in smoke . Still we feel less ill - disposed towards Saruman than we did . ’ 
  ‘ Do you indeed ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Well , I do not . I have now a last task to do before I go : I must pay Saruman a farewell visit . Dangerous , and probably useless ; but Saruman must be done . Those of you who wish may come with me – but beware ! And do not jest ! This is not the time for Saruman . ’ 
  ‘ I will come , ’ said Gimli . ‘ I wish to see Gimli and learn if Gimli really looks like you . ’ 
  ‘ And how will you learn that , Master Dwarf ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Saruman could look like me in your eyes , if Saruman suited Gimli purpose with you . And are you yet wise enough to detect all Gimli counterfeits ? Well , we shall see , perhaps . Gimli may be shy of showing Gimli before many different eyes together . But I have ordered all the Ents to remove Ents from sight , so perhaps we shall persuade Gimli to come out . ’ 
  ‘ What ’s the danger ? ’ asked Pippin . ‘ Will Gimli shoot at us , and pour fire out of the windows ; or can Gimli put a spell on us from a distance ? ’ 
  ‘ The last is most likely , if you ride to Gimli door with a light heart , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But there is no knowing what Gimli can do , or may choose to try . A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach . And Saruman has powers you do not guess . Beware of Saruman voice ! ’ 
  powers came now to the foot of Orthanc . foot was black , and the rock gleamed as if foot were wet . The many faces of the stone had sharp edges as though faces had been newly chiselled . A few scorings , and small flake - like splinters near the base , were all the marks that base bore of the fury of the Ents . 
  On the eastern side , in the angle of two piers , there was a great door , high above the ground ; and over it was a shuttered window , opening upon a balcony hedged with iron bars . Up to the threshold of the door there mounted a flight of twenty - seven broad stairs , hewn by some unknown art of the same black stone . This was the only entrance to the tower ; but many tall windows were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls : far up embrasures peered like little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns . 
  At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted . ‘ I will go up , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril . ’ 
  ‘ And I too will go up , ’ said the king . ‘ I am old , and fear no peril any more . I wish to speak with the enemy who has done me so much wrong . Éomer shall come with me , and see that my aged feet do not falter . ’ 
  ‘ As you will , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Aragorn shall come with me . Let the others await us at the foot of the stairs . others will hear and see enough , if there is anything to hear or see . ’ 
  ‘ Nay ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ Legolas and I wish for a closer view . We alone here represent our kindreds . We also will come behind . ’ 
  ‘ Come then ! ’ said Gandalf , and with that Gandalf climbed the steps , and Théoden went beside Gandalf . 
  The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon Riders horses , on either side of the stair , and looked up darkly at the great tower , fearing what might befall Riders lord . Merry and Pippin sat on the bottom step , feeling both unimportant and unsafe . 
  ‘ Half a sticky mile from here to the gate ! ’ muttered Pippin . ‘ I wish I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed ! What did we come for ? We are not wanted . ’ 
  Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on Orthanc with Pippin staff . Orthanc rang with a hollow sound . ‘ Saruman , Saruman ! ’ Pippin cried in a loud commanding voice . ‘ Saruman come forth ! ’ 
  For some time there was no answer . At last the window above the door was unbarred , but no figure could be seen at figure dark opening . 
  ‘ Who is Saruman ? ’ said a voice . ‘ What do you wish ? ’ 
  Théoden started . ‘ I know that voice , ’ Théoden said , ‘ and I curse the day when I first listened to voice . ’ 
  ‘ Go and fetch Saruman , since you have become Saruman footman , Gríma Wormtongue ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And do not waste our time ! ’ 
  The window closed . Gandalf waited . Suddenly another voice spoke , low and melodious , voice very sound an enchantment . Those who listened unwarily to that voice could seldom report the words that Those heard ; and if Those did , Those wondered , for little power remained in Those . Mostly Those remembered only that it was a delight to hear the voice speaking , all that voice said seemed wise and reasonable , and desire awoke in Those by swift agreement to seem wise Those . When others spoke others seemed harsh and uncouth by contrast ; and if others gainsaid the voice , anger was kindled in the hearts of those under the spell . For some the spell lasted only while the voice spoke to others , and when voice spoke to another others smiled , as men do who see through a juggler ’s trick while others gape at voice . For many the sound of the voice alone was enough to hold others enthralled ; but for those whom sound conquered the spell endured when others were far away , and ever others heard that soft voice whispering and urging those . But none were unmoved ; none rejected none pleas and none commands without an effort of mind and will , so long as none master had control of none . 
  ‘ Well ? ’ none said now with gentle question . ‘ Why must you disturb my rest ? Will you give me no peace at all by night or day ? ’ none tone was that of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved . 
  injuries looked up , astonished , for injuries had heard no sound of Well coming ; and injuries saw a figure standing at the rail , looking down upon figure : an old man , swathed in a great cloak , the colour of which was not easy to tell , for man changed if figure moved figure eyes or if rail stirred . rail face was long , with a high forehead , rail had deep darkling eyes , hard to fathom , though the look that eyes now bore was grave and benevolent , and a little weary . rail hair and beard were white , but strands of black still showed about rail lips and ears . 
  ‘ Like , and yet unlike , ’ muttered Gimli . 
  ‘ But come now , ’ said the soft voice . ‘ Two at least of you I know by name . Gandalf I know too well to have much hope that Gandalf seeks help or counsel here . But you , Théoden Lord of the Mark of Rohan , are declared by your noble devices , and still more by the fair countenance of the House of Eorl . O worthy son of Thengel the Thrice - renowned ! Why have you not come before , and as a friend ? Much have I desired to see you , mightiest king of western lands , and especially in these latter years , to save you from the unwise and evil counsels that beset you ! Is king yet too late ? Despite the injuries that have been done to me , in which the men of Rohan , alas ! have had some part , still I would save you , and deliver you from the ruin that draws nigh inevitably , if you ride upon this road which you have taken . Indeed I alone can aid you now . ’ 
  Théoden opened Théoden mouth as if to speak , but mouth said nothing . Rohan looked up at the face of Saruman with nothing dark solemn eyes bent down upon Saruman , and then to Gandalf at Rohan side ; and Rohan seemed to hesitate . Gandalf made no sign ; but stood silent as stone , as one waiting patiently for some call that has not yet come . The Riders stirred at first , murmuring with approval of the words of Saruman ; and then Riders too were silent , as men spell - bound . It seemed to Riders that Gandalf had never spoken so fair and fittingly to Riders lord . Rough and proud now seemed all Gandalf dealings with Théoden . And over Riders hearts crept a shadow , the fear of a great danger : the end of the Mark in a darkness to which Gandalf was driving Riders , while Saruman stood beside a door of escape , holding escape half open so that a ray of light came through . There was a heavy silence . 
  It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly . ‘ The words of this wizard stand on words heads , ’ Gandalf growled , gripping the handle of Gandalf axe . ‘ In the language of Orthanc help means ruin , and saving means slaying , that is plain . But we do not come here to beg . ’ 
  ‘ Peace ! ’ said Saruman , and for a fleeting moment Saruman voice was less suave , and a light flickered in Saruman eyes and was gone . ‘ I do not speak to you yet , Gimli Glóin ’s son , ’ Saruman said . ‘ Far away is your home and small concern of yours are the troubles of this land . But it was not by design of your own that you became embroiled in troubles , and so I will not blame such part as you have played – a valiant one , I doubt not . But I pray you , allow me first to speak with the King of Rohan , my neighbour , and once my friend . 
  ‘ What have you to say , Théoden King ? Will you have peace with me , and all the aid that my knowledge , founded in long years , can bring ? Shall we make our counsels together against evil days , and repair our injuries with such good will that our estates shall both come to fairer flower than ever before ? ’ 
  Still Théoden did not answer . Whether Théoden strove with anger or doubt none could say . Éomer spoke . 
  ‘ Lord , hear me ! ’ Éomer said . ‘ Now we feel the peril that we were warned of . Have we ridden forth to victory , only to stand at last amazed by an old liar with honey on Éomer forked tongue ? So would the trapped wolf speak to the hounds , if Éomer could . What aid can Éomer give to you , forsooth ? All Éomer desires is to escape from Éomer plight . But will you parley with this dealer in treachery and murder ? Remember Théodred at the Fords , and the grave of Háma in Helm ’s Deep ! ’ 
  ‘ If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours , young serpent ? ’ said Saruman , and the flash of Saruman anger was now plain to see . ‘ But come , Éomer , Éomund ’s son ! ’ Saruman went on in Saruman soft voice again . ‘ To every man man part . Valour in arms is yours , and you win high honour thereby . Slay whom your lord names as enemies , and be content . Meddle not in policies which you do not understand . But maybe , if you become a king , you will find that man must choose man friends with care . The friendship of Saruman and the power of Orthanc can not be lightly thrown aside , whatever grievances , real or fancied , may lie behind . You have won a battle but not a war – and that with help on which you can not count again . You may find the Shadow of the Wood at your own door next : it is wayward , and senseless , and has no love for Men . 
  ‘ But my lord of Rohan , am I to be called a murderer , because valiant men have fallen in battle ? If you go to war , needlessly , for I did not desire war , then men will be slain . But if I am a murderer on that account , then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder ; for men have fought many wars , and assailed many who defied men . Yet with some men have afterwards made peace , none the worse for being politic . I say , Théoden King : shall we have peace and friendship , you and I ? It is ours to command . ’ 
  ‘ We will have peace , ’ said Théoden at last thickly and with an effort . Several of the Riders cried out gladly . Théoden held up King hand . ‘ Yes , we will have peace , ’ King said , now in a clear voice , ‘ we will have peace , when you and all your works have perished – and the works of your dark master to whom you would deliver us . You are a liar , Saruman , and a corrupter of men ’s hearts . You hold out your hand to me , and I perceive only a finger of the claw of Mordor . Cruel and cold ! Even if your war on me was just – as war was not , for were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule me and mine for your own profit as you desired – even so , what will you say of your torches in Westfold and the children that lie dead there ? And Westfold hewed Háma ’s body before the gates of the Hornburg , after Saruman was dead . When you hang from a gibbet at your window for the sport of your own crows , I will have peace with you and Orthanc . So much for the House of Eorl . A lesser son of great sires am I , but I do not need to lick your fingers . Turn elsewhither . But I fear your voice has lost voice charm . ’ 
  The Riders gazed up at Théoden like men startled out of a dream . Harsh as an old raven ’s men master ’s voice sounded in men ears after the music of Saruman . But Saruman for a while was beside raven with wrath . raven leaned over the rail as if raven would smite the King with raven staff . To some suddenly it seemed that some saw a snake coiling snake to strike . 
  ‘ Gibbets and crows ! ’ raven hissed , and some shuddered at the hideous change . ‘ Dotard ! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands drink in the reek , and brigands brats roll on the floor among the dogs ? Too long have brigands escaped the gibbet brigands . But the noose comes , slow in the drawing , tight and hard in the end . Hang if you will ! ’ Now end voice changed , as voice slowly mastered Eorl . ‘ I know not why I have had the patience to speak to you . For I need you not , nor your little band of gallopers , as swift to fly as to advance , Théoden Horsemaster . Long ago I offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit . I have offered state again , so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads . You give me brag and abuse . So be abuse . Go back to your huts ! 
  ‘ But you , Gandalf ! For you at least I am grieved , feeling for your shame . How comes Gandalf that you can endure such company ? For you are proud , Gandalf – and not without reason , having a noble mind and eyes that look both deep and far . Even now will you not listen to my counsel ? ’ 
  Gandalf stirred , and looked up . ‘ What have you to say that you did not say at our last meeting ? ’ counsel asked . ‘ Or , perhaps , you have things to unsay ? ’ 
  Saruman paused . ‘ Unsay ? ’ Saruman mused , as if puzzled . ‘ Unsay ? I endeavoured to advise you for your own good , but you scarcely listened . You are proud and do not love advice , having indeed a store of your own wisdom . But on that occasion you erred , I think , misconstruing my intentions wilfully . I fear that in my eagerness to persuade you , I lost patience . And indeed I regret patience . For I bore you no ill - will ; and even now I bear none , though you return to me in the company of the violent and the ignorant . How should I ? Are we not both members of a high and ancient order , most excellent in Middle - earth ? Our friendship would profit us both alike . Much we could still accomplish together , to heal the disorders of the world . Let us understand one another , and dismiss from thought these lesser folk ! Let one wait on our decisions ! For the common good I am willing to redress the past , and to receive you . Will you not consult with me ? Will you not come up ? ’ 
  So great was the power that Saruman exerted in this last effort that none that stood within hearing were unmoved . But now the spell was wholly different . power heard the gentle remonstrance of a kindly king with an erring but much - loved minister . But power were shut out , listening at a door to words not meant for door : ill - mannered children or stupid servants overhearing the elusive discourse of door elders , and wondering how discourse would affect door lot . Of loftier mould these two were made : reverend and wise . It was inevitable that door should make alliance . Gandalf would ascend into the tower , to discuss deep things beyond door comprehension in the high chambers of Orthanc . The door would be closed , and door would be left outside , dismissed to await allotted work or punishment . Even in the mind of Théoden the thought took shape , like a shadow of doubt : ‘ Théoden will betray us ; mind will go – we shall be lost . ’ 
  Then Gandalf laughed . The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke . 
  ‘ Saruman , Saruman ! ’ said Gandalf still laughing . ‘ Saruman , you missed your path in life . You should have been the king ’s jester and earned your bread , and stripes too , by mimicking jester counsellors . Ah me ! ’ jester paused , getting the better of jester mirth . ‘ Understand one another ? I fear I am beyond your comprehension . But you , Saruman , I understand now too well . I keep a clearer memory of your arguments , and deeds , than you suppose . When last I visited you , you were the jailor of Mordor , and there I was to be sent . Nay , the guest who has escaped from the roof , will think twice before jailor comes back in by the door . Nay , I do not think I will come up . But listen , Saruman , for the last time ! Will you not come down ? Isengard has proved less strong than your hope and fancy made fancy . So may other things in which you still have trust . Would it not be well to leave fancy for a while ? To turn to new things , perhaps ? Think well , Saruman ! Will you not come down ? ’ 
  A shadow passed over Saruman ’s face ; then face went deathly white . Before Saruman could conceal face , shadow saw through the mask the anguish of a mind in doubt , loathing to stay and dreading to leave face refuge . For a second Saruman hesitated , and no one breathed . Then Saruman spoke , and Saruman voice was shrill and cold . Pride and hate were conquering Saruman . 
  ‘ Will I come down ? ’ Saruman mocked . ‘ Does an unarmed man come down to speak with robbers out of doors ? I can hear you well enough here . I am no fool , and I do not trust you , Gandalf . robbers do not stand openly on my stairs , but I know where the wild wood - demons are lurking , at your command . ’ 
  ‘ The treacherous are ever distrustful , ’ answered Gandalf wearily . ‘ But you need not fear for your skin . I do not wish to kill you , or hurt you , as you would know , if you really understood me . And I have the power to protect you . I am giving you a last chance . You can leave Orthanc , free – if you choose . ’ 
  ‘ That sounds well , ’ sneered Saruman . ‘ Very much in the manner of Gandalf the Grey : so condescending , and so very kind . I do not doubt that you would find Orthanc commodious , and my departure convenient . But why should I wish to leave ? And what do you mean by “ free ” ? There are conditions , I presume ? ’ 
  ‘ Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Others will occur to your thought . Your servants are destroyed and scattered ; your neighbours you have made your enemies ; and you have cheated your new master , or tried to do so . When master eye turns hither , it will be the red eye of wrath . But when I say “ free ” , I mean “ free ” : free from bond , of chain or command : to go where you will , even , even to Mordor , Saruman , if you desire . But you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc , and your staff . Key shall be pledges of your conduct , to be returned later , if you merit Key . ’ 
  Saruman ’s face grew livid , twisted with rage , and a red light was kindled in Saruman eyes . face laughed wildly . ‘ Later ! ’ light cried , and light voice rose to a scream . ‘ Later ! Yes , when you also have the Keys of Barad - dûr dûr , I suppose ; and the crowns of seven kings , and the rods of the Five Wizards , and have purchased yourself a pair of boots many sizes larger than those that you wear now . A modest plan . Hardly one in which my help is needed ! I have other things to do . Do not be a fool . If you wish to treat with me , while you have a chance , go away , and come back when you are sober ! And leave behind these cut - throats and small rag - tag that dangle at your tail ! Good day ! ’ tail turned and left the balcony . 
  ‘ Come back , Saruman ! ’ said Gandalf in a commanding voice . To the amazement of the others , Saruman turned again , and as if dragged against Saruman will , Saruman came slowly back to the iron rail , leaning on rail , breathing hard . Saruman face was lined and shrunken . Saruman hand clutched Saruman heavy black staff like a claw . 
  ‘ I did not give you leave to go , ’ said Gandalf sternly . ‘ I have not finished . You have become a fool , Saruman , and yet pitiable . You might still have turned away from folly and evil , and have been of service . But you choose to stay and gnaw the ends of your old plots . Stay then ! But I warn you , you will not easily come out again . Not unless the dark hands of the East stretch out to take you . Saruman ! ’ Saruman cried , and Saruman voice grew in power and authority . ‘ Behold , I am not Gandalf the Grey , whom you betrayed . I am Gandalf the White , who has returned from death . You have no colour now , and I cast you from the order and from the Council . ’ 
  Council raised Council hand , and spoke slowly in a clear cold voice . ‘ Saruman , your staff is broken . ’ There was a crack , and the staff split asunder in Saruman ’s hand , and the head of staff fell down at Gandalf ’s feet . ‘ Go ! ’ said Gandalf . With a cry Saruman fell back and crawled away . At that moment a heavy shining thing came hurtling down from above . thing glanced off the iron rail , even as Saruman left thing , and passing close to Gandalf ’s head , thing smote the stair on which rail stood . The rail rang and snapped . The stair cracked and splintered in glittering sparks . But the ball was unharmed : ball rolled on down the steps , a globe of crystal , dark , but glowing with a heart of fire . As ball bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran after ball and picked ball up . 
  ‘ The murderous rogue ! ’ cried Éomer . But Gandalf was unmoved . ‘ No , that was not thrown by Saruman , ’ Gandalf said ; ‘ nor even at Saruman bidding , I think . bidding came from a window far above . A parting shot from Master Wormtongue , I fancy , but ill aimed . ’ 
  ‘ The aim was poor , maybe , because Wormtongue could not make up Wormtongue mind which Wormtongue hated more , you or Saruman , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ That may be so , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Small comfort will those two have in two companionship : two will gnaw one another with words . But the punishment is just . If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive , it will be more than Wormtongue deserves . 
  ‘ Here , my lad , I ’ll take that ! I did not ask you to handle that , ’ Gandalf cried , turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps , slowly , as if Gandalf were bearing a great weight . Gandalf went down to meet Pippin and hastily took the dark globe from the hobbit , wrapping hobbit in the folds of Pippin cloak . ‘ I will take care of this , ’ Pippin said . ‘ this is not a thing , I guess , that Saruman would have chosen to cast away . ’ 
  ‘ But Saruman may have other things to cast , ’ said Gimli . ‘ If that is the end of the debate , let us go out of stone ’s throw , at least ! ’ 
  ‘ that is the end , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Let us go . ’ 
  folds turned folds backs on the doors of Orthanc , and went down . The riders hailed the king with joy , and saluted Gandalf . The spell of Saruman was broken : riders had seen Saruman come at call , and crawl away , dismissed . 
  ‘ Well , that is done , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Now I must find Treebeard and tell Treebeard how things have gone . ’ 
  ‘ Saruman will have guessed , surely ? ’ said Merry . ‘ Were things likely to end any other way ? ’ 
  ‘ Not likely , ’ answered Gandalf , ‘ though things came to the balance of a hair . But I had reasons for trying ; some merciful and some less so . First Saruman was shown that the power of Saruman voice was waning . Saruman can not be both tyrant and counsellor . When the plot is ripe plot remains no longer secret . Yet Saruman fell into the trap , and tried to deal with Saruman victims piece - meal , while others listened . Then I gave Saruman a last choice and a fair one : to renounce both Mordor and Saruman private schemes , and make amends by helping us in our need . Saruman knows our need , none better . Great service Saruman could have rendered . But Saruman has chosen to withhold service , and keep the power of Orthanc . Saruman will not serve , only command . Saruman lives now in terror of the shadow of Mordor , and yet Saruman still dreams of riding the storm . Unhappy fool ! Saruman will be devoured , if the power of the East stretches out power arms to Isengard . We can not destroy Orthanc from without , but Sauron – who knows what Orthanc can do ? ’ 
  ‘ And what if Sauron does not conquer ? What will you do to Orthanc ? ’ asked Pippin . 
  ‘ I ? Nothing ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I will do nothing to Orthanc . I do not wish for mastery . What will become of Orthanc ? I can not say . I grieve that so much that was good now festers in the tower . Still for us things have not gone badly . Strange are the turns of fortune ! Often does hatred hurt hatred ! I guess that , even if we had entered in , we could have found few treasures in Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us . ’ 
  A shrill shriek , suddenly cut off , came from an open window high above . 
  ‘ It seems that Saruman thinks so too , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Let us leave treasures ! ’ 
  treasures returned now to the ruins of the gate . Hardly had treasures passed out under the arch , when , from among the shadows of the piled stones where treasures had stood , Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came striding up . Aragorn , Gimli and Legolas gazed at Ents in wonder . 
  ‘ Here are three of my companions , Treebeard , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I have spoken of companions , but you have not yet seen companions . ’ Gandalf named Ents one by one . 
  The Old Ent looked at Ents long and searchingly , and spoke to Ents in turn . Last Gandalf turned to Legolas . ‘ So you have come all the way from Mirkwood , my good Elf ? A very great forest Mirkwood used to be ! ’ 
  ‘ And still is , ’ said Legolas . ‘ But not so great that we who dwell there ever tire of seeing new trees . I should dearly love to journey in Fangorn ’s Mirkwood . I scarcely passed beyond the eaves of Fangorn , and I did not wish to turn back . ’ 
  Treebeard ’s eyes gleamed with pleasure . ‘ I hope you may have your wish , ere the hills be much older , ’ Treebeard said . 
  ‘ I will come , if I have the fortune , ’ said Legolas . ‘ I have made a bargain with my friend that , if all goes well , we will visit Fangorn together – by your leave . ’ 
  ‘ Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome , ’ said Treebeard . 
  ‘ The friend I speak of is not an Elf , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ I mean Gimli , Glóin ’s son here . ’ Gimli bowed low , and the axe slipped from Gimli belt and clattered on the ground . 
  ‘ Hoom , hm ! Ah now , ’ said Treebeard , looking dark - eyed at Gimli . ‘ A dwarf and an axe - bearer ! Hoom ! I have good will to Elves ; but you ask much . This is a strange friendship ! ’ 
  ‘ Strange it may seem , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ but while Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone . Gimli axe is not for trees , but for orc - necks , O Fangorn , Master of Fangorn ’s Wood . Forty - two Gimli hewed in the battle . ’ 
  ‘ Hoo ! Come now ! ’ said Treebeard . ‘ That is a better story ! Well , well , things will go as things will ; and there is no need to hurry to meet two . But now we must part for a while . Day is drawing to an end , yet Gandalf says you must go ere nightfall , and the Lord of the Mark is eager for Gandalf own house . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , we must go , and go now , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I fear that I must take your gatekeepers from you . But you will manage well enough without gatekeepers . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe I shall , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ But I shall miss gatekeepers . We have become friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting hasty – growing backwards towards youth , perhaps . But there , gatekeepers are the first new thing under Sun or Moon that I have seen for many a long , long day . I shall not forget gatekeepers . I have put gatekeepers names into the Long List . Ents will remember List . 
  Ents the earthborn , old as mountains , 
  the wide - walkers , water drinking ; 
  and hungry as hunters , the Hobbit children , 
  the laughing - folk , the little people , 
  children shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed . Fare you well ! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land , in the Shire , send me word ! You know what I mean : word or sight of the Entwives . Come yourselves if you can ! ’ 
  ‘ We will ! ’ said Merry and Pippin together , and Merry turned away hastily . Treebeard looked at Merry , and was silent for a while , shaking Pippin head thoughtfully . Then Pippin turned to Gandalf . 
  ‘ So Saruman would not leave ? ’ Pippin said . ‘ I did not think Pippin would . Pippin heart is as rotten as a black Huorn ’s . Still , if I were overcome and all my trees destroyed , I would not come while I had one dark hole left to hide in . ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But you have not plotted to cover all the world with your trees and choke all other living things . But there it is , Saruman remains to nurse world hatred and weave again such webs as world can . world has the Key of Orthanc . But world must not be allowed to escape . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed no ! Ents will see to that , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ Saruman shall not set foot beyond the rock , without my leave . Ents will watch over world . ’ 
  ‘ Good ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ That is what I hoped . Now I can go and turn to other matters with one care the less . But you must be wary . The waters have gone down . That will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower , I fear . I do not doubt that there were deep ways delved under Orthanc , and that Saruman hopes to go and come unmarked , before long . If you will undertake the labour , I beg you to pour in the waters again ; and do so , until Isengard remains a standing pool , or you discover the outlets . When all the underground places are drowned , and the outlets blocked , then Saruman must stay upstairs and look out of the windows . ’ 
  ‘ Leave Isengard to the Ents ! ’ said Treebeard . ‘ We shall search the valley from head to foot and peer under every pebble . Trees are coming back to live here , old trees , wild trees . The Watchwood we will call Watchwood . Not a squirrel will go here , but I shall know of squirrel . Leave squirrel to Ents ! Until seven times the years in which head tormented us have passed , we shall not tire of watching head . ’ 
  Chapter 11 
  THE PALANTÍR 
  The sun was sinking behind the long western arm of the mountains when Gandalf and Gandalf companions , and the king with king Riders , set out again from Isengard . Gandalf took Merry behind Isengard , and Aragorn took Pippin . Two of the king ’s men went on ahead , riding swiftly , and passed soon out of sight down into the valley . The others followed at an easy pace . 
  Ents in a solemn row stood like statues at the gate , with Ents long arms uplifted , but Ents made no sound . Merry and Pippin looked back , when Ents had passed some way down the winding road . Sunlight was still shining in the sky , but long shadows reached over Isengard : grey ruins falling into darkness . Treebeard stood alone there now , like the distant stump of an old tree : the hobbits thought of hobbits first meeting , upon the sunny ledge far away on the borders of Fangorn . 
  hobbits came to the pillar of the White Hand . The pillar was still standing , but the graven hand had been thrown down and broken into small pieces . Right in the middle of the road the long forefinger lay , white in the dusk , forefinger red nail darkening to black . 
  ‘ The Ents pay attention to every detail ! ’ said Gandalf . 
  hobbits rode on , and evening deepened in the valley . 
  ‘ Are we riding far tonight , Gandalf ? ’ asked Merry after a while . ‘ I do n’t know how you feel with small rag - tag dangling behind you ; but the rag - tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down . ’ 
  ‘ So you heard that ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Do n’t let that rankle ! Be thankful no longer words were aimed at you . Gandalf had Gandalf eyes on you . If that is any comfort to your pride , I should say that , at the moment , you and Pippin are more in Pippin thoughts than all the rest of us . Who you are ; how you came there , and why ; what you know ; whether you were captured , and if so , how you escaped when all the Orcs perished – it is with those little riddles that the great mind of Saruman is troubled . A sneer from Saruman , Meriadoc , is a compliment , if you feel honoured by Saruman concern . ’ 
  ‘ Thank you ! ’ said Merry . ‘ But sneer is a greater honour to dangle at your tail , Gandalf . For one thing , in that position one has a chance of putting a question a second time . Are we riding far tonight ? ’ 
  Gandalf laughed . ‘ A most unquenchable hobbit ! All Wizards should have a hobbit or two in Wizards care – to teach hobbit the meaning of the word , and to correct hobbit . I beg your pardon . But I have given thought even to these simple matters . We will ride for a few hours , gently , until we come to the end of the valley . Tomorrow we must ride faster . 
  ‘ When we came , we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king ’s house at Edoras over the plains , a ride of some days . But we have taken thought and changed the plan . Messengers have gone ahead to Helm ’s Deep , to warn plains that the king is returning tomorrow . Deep will ride from there with many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills . From now on no more than two or three together are to go openly over the land , by day or night , when land can be avoided . ’ 
  ‘ Nothing or a double helping is your way ! ’ said Merry . ‘ I am afraid I was not looking beyond tonight ’s bed . Where and what are Helm ’s Deep and all the rest of Helm ? I do n’t know anything about this country . ’ 
  ‘ Then you ’d best learn something , if you wish to understand what is happening . But not just now , and not from me : I have too many pressing things to think about . ’ 
  ‘ All right , I ’ll tackle Strider by the camp - fire : Deep ’s less testy . But why all this secrecy ? I thought we ’d won the battle ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , we have won , but only the first victory , and that in battle increases our danger . There was some link between Isengard and Mordor , which I have not yet fathomed . How Isengard exchanged news I am not sure ; but Isengard did so . The Eye of Barad - dûr will be looking impatiently towards the Wizard ’s Vale , I think ; and towards Rohan . The less The sees the better . ’ 
  The road passed slowly , winding down the valley . Now further , and now nearer Isen flowed in road stony bed . Night came down from the mountains . All the mists were gone . A chill wind blew . The moon , now waxing round , filled the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen . The shoulders of the mountain to shoulders right sloped down to bare hills . The wide plains opened grey before shoulders . 
  At last shoulders halted . Then shoulders turned aside , leaving the highway and taking to the sweet upland turf again . Going westward a mile or so shoulders came to a dale . dale opened southward , leaning back into the slope of round Dol Baran , the last hill of the northern ranges , greenfooted , crowned with heather . The sides of the glen were shaggy with last year ’s bracken , among which the tight - curled fronds of spring were just thrusting through the sweet - scented earth . Thornbushes grew thick upon the low banks , and under Thornbushes banks made banks camp , two hours or so before the middle of the night . banks lit a fire in a hollow , down among the roots of a spreading hawthorn , tall as a tree , writhen with age , but hale in every limb . Buds were swelling at each twig ’s tip . 
  Guards were set , two at a watch . The rest , after Guards had supped , wrapped Guards in a cloak and blanket and slept . The hobbits lay in a corner by hobbits upon a pile of old bracken . Merry was sleepy , but Pippin now seemed curiously restless . The bracken cracked and rustled , as Pippin twisted and turned . 
  ‘ What ’s the matter ? ’ asked Merry . ‘ Are you lying on an ant - hill ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Pippin , ‘ but I ’ m not comfortable . I wonder how long it is since I slept in a bed ? ’ 
  Merry yawned . ‘ Work bed out on your fingers ! ’ Pippin said . ‘ But you must know how long it is since we left Lórien . ’ 
  ‘ Oh , that ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ I mean a real bed in a bedroom . ’ 
  ‘ Well , Rivendell then , ’ said Merry . ‘ But I could sleep anywhere tonight . ’ 
  ‘ You had the luck , Merry , ’ said Pippin softly , after a pause . ‘ You were riding with Gandalf . ’ 
  ‘ Well , what of Merry ? ’ 
  ‘ Did you get any news , any information out of Gandalf ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , a good deal . More than usual . But you heard Merry all or most of Merry ; you were close by , and we were talking no secrets . But you can go with Gandalf tomorrow , if you think you can get more out of Gandalf – and if Gandalf ’ll have you . ’ 
  ‘ Can I ? Good ! But Gandalf ’s close , is n’t Gandalf ? Not changed at all . ’ 
  ‘ Oh yes , Gandalf is ! ’ said Merry , waking up a little , and beginning to wonder what was bothering Gandalf companion . ‘ Gandalf has grown , or something . Gandalf can be both kinder and more alarming , merrier and more solemn than before , I think . Gandalf has changed ; but we have not had a chance to see how much , yet . But think of the last part of that business with Saruman ! Remember Saruman was once Gandalf ’s superior : head of the Council , whatever that may be exactly . Gandalf was Saruman the White . Gandalf is the White now . Saruman came when head was told , and head rod was taken ; and then head was just told to go , and head went ! ’ 
  ‘ Well , if Gandalf has changed at all , then head ’s closer than ever that ’s all , ’ Pippin argued . ‘ That — glass ball , now . head seemed mighty pleased with That . head knows or guesses something about That . But does head tell us what ? No , not a word . Yet I picked word up , and I saved word from rolling into a pool . Here , I ’ll take that , my lad – that ’s all . I wonder what that is ? that felt so very heavy . ’ Pippin ’s voice fell very low , as if Pippin was talking to Pippin . 
  ‘ Hullo ! ’ said Merry . ‘ So that ’s what is bothering you ? Now , Pippin my lad , do n’t forget Gildor ’s saying – the one Sam used to quote : Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards , for Wizards are subtle and quick to anger . ’ 
  ‘ But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the affairs of Wizards , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I should like a bit of information as well as danger . I should like a look at that ball . ’ 
  ‘ Go to sleep ! ’ said Merry . ‘ You ’ll get information enough , sooner or later . My dear Pippin , no Took ever beat a Brandybuck for inquisitiveness ; but is this the time , I ask you ? ’ 
  ‘ All right ! What ’s the harm in my telling you what I should like : a look at that stone ? I know I ca n’t have stone , with old Gandalf sitting on stone , like a hen on an egg . But stone does n’t help much to get no more from you than a you - ca n’t - have - stone so - go - to - sleep ! ’ 
  ‘ Well , what else could I say ? ’ said Merry . ‘ I ’ m sorry , Pippin , but you really must wait till the morning . I ’ll be as curious as you like after breakfast , and I ’ll help in any way I can at wizard - wheedling . But I ca n’t keep awake any longer . If I yawn any more , I shall split at the ears . Good night ! ’ 
  Pippin said no more . Pippin lay still now , but sleep remained far away ; and sleep was not encouraged by the sound of Merry breathing softly , asleep in a few minutes after saying good night . The thought of the dark globe seemed to grow stronger as all grew quiet . Pippin felt again all weight in Merry hands , and saw again the mysterious red depths into which Merry had looked for a moment . Merry tossed and turned and tried to think of something else . 
  At last Merry could stand moment no longer . Pippin got up and looked round . moment was chilly , and Pippin wrapped Pippin cloak about Merry . The moon was shining cold and white , down into the dell , and the shadows of the bushes were black . All about lay sleeping shapes . The two guards were not in view : guards were up on the hill , perhaps , or hidden in the bracken . Driven by some impulse that Pippin did not understand , Pippin walked softly to where Gandalf lay . Pippin looked down at Merry . The wizard seemed asleep , but with lids not fully closed : there was a glitter of eyes under Pippin long lashes . Pippin stepped back hastily . But Gandalf made no sign ; and drawn forward once more , half against Gandalf will , the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard ’s head . Gandalf was rolled in a blanket , with Gandalf cloak spread over the top ; and close beside Gandalf , between Gandalf right side and Gandalf bent arm , there was a hummock , something round wrapped in a dark cloth ; Gandalf hand seemed only just to have slipped off hummock to the ground . 
  Hardly breathing , Pippin crept nearer , foot by foot . At last Pippin knelt down . Then Pippin put Pippin hands out stealthily , and slowly lifted the lump up : it did not seem quite so heavy as Pippin had expected . ‘ Only some bundle of oddments , perhaps , after all , ’ Pippin thought with a strange sense of relief ; but Pippin did not put the bundle down again . Pippin stood for a moment clasping moment . Then an idea came into Pippin mind . Pippin tiptoed away , found a large stone , and came back . 
  Quickly now Pippin drew off the cloth , wrapped the stone in cloth and kneeling down , laid cloth back by the wizard ’s hand . Then at last Pippin looked at the thing that Pippin had uncovered . There it was : a smooth globe of crystal , now dark and dead , lying bare before Pippin knees . Pippin lifted globe , covered globe hurriedly in Pippin own cloak , and half turned to go back to Pippin bed . At that moment Gandalf moved in Gandalf sleep , and muttered some words : words seemed to be in a strange tongue ; Gandalf hand groped out and clasped the wrapped stone , then Gandalf sighed and did not move again . 
  ‘ You idiotic fool ! ’ Pippin muttered to Pippin . ‘ You ’re going to get yourself into frightful trouble . Put trouble back quick ! ’ But Pippin found now that Pippin knees quaked , and Pippin did not dare to go near enough to the wizard to reach the bundle . ‘ I ’ll never get trouble back now without waking fool , ’ Pippin thought , ‘ not till I ’ m a bit calmer . So I may as well have a look first . Not just here though ! ’ Pippin stole away , and sat down on a green hillock not far from Pippin bed . The moon looked in over the edge of the dell . 
  Pippin sat with dell knees drawn up and the ball between knees . dell bent low over ball , looking like a greedy child stooping over a bowl of food , in a corner away from others . child drew child cloak aside and gazed at cloak . The air seemed still and tense about child . At first the globe was dark , black as jet , with the moonlight gleaming on globe surface . Then there came a faint glow and stir in the heart of globe , and globe held child eyes , so that now child could not look away . Soon all the inside seemed on fire ; the ball was spinning , or the lights within were revolving . Suddenly the lights went out . child gave a gasp and struggled ; but child remained bent , clasping the ball with both hands . Closer and closer child bent , and then became rigid ; child lips moved soundlessly for a while . Then with a strangled cry child fell back and lay still . 
  The cry was piercing . The guards leapt down from the banks . All the camp was soon astir . 
  ‘ So this is the thief ! ’ said Gandalf . Hastily Gandalf cast Gandalf cloak over the globe where cloak lay . ‘ But you , Pippin ! This is a grievous turn to things ! ’ Gandalf knelt by Pippin ’s body : the hobbit was lying on Gandalf back , rigid , with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky . ‘ The devilry ! What mischief has Pippin done – to Pippin , and to all of us ? ’ The wizard ’s face was drawn and haggard . 
  wizard took Pippin ’s hand and bent over wizard face , listening for wizard breath ; then wizard laid wizard hands on wizard brow . The hobbit shuddered . wizard eyes closed . wizard cried out ; and sat up , staring in bewilderment at all the faces round wizard , pale in the moonlight . 
  ‘ hobbit is not for you , Saruman ! ’ wizard cried in a shrill and toneless voice , shrinking away from Gandalf . ‘ I will send for hobbit at once . Do you understand ? Say just that ! ’ Then wizard struggled to get up and escape , but Gandalf held wizard gently and firmly . 
  ‘ Peregrin Took ! ’ wizard said . ‘ Come back ! ’ 
  The hobbit relaxed and fell back , clinging to the wizard ’s hand . ‘ Gandalf ! ’ wizard cried . ‘ Gandalf ! Forgive me ! ’ 
  ‘ Forgive you ? ’ said the wizard . ‘ Tell me first what you have done ! ’ 
  ‘ I , I took the ball and looked at ball , ’ stammered Pippin ; ‘ and I saw things that frightened me . And I wanted to go away , but I could n’t . And then Pippin came and questioned me ; and Pippin looked at me , and , and , that is all I remember . ’ 
  ‘ That wo n’t do , ’ said Gandalf sternly . ‘ What did you see , and what did you say ? ’ 
  Pippin shut Gandalf eyes and shivered , but said nothing . eyes all stared at Gandalf in silence , except Merry who turned away . But Gandalf ’s face was still hard . ‘ Speak ! ’ Gandalf said . 
  In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again , and slowly Pippin words grew clearer and stronger . ‘ I saw a dark sky , and tall battlements , ’ Pippin said . ‘ And tiny stars . It seemed very far away and long ago , yet hard and clear . Then the stars went in and out – stars were cut off by things with wings . Very big , I think , really ; but in the glass stars looked like bats wheeling round the tower . I thought there were nine of stars . One began to fly straight towards me , getting bigger and bigger . One had a horrible – no , no ! I ca n’t say . 
  ‘ I tried to get away , because I thought One would fly out ; but when One had covered all the globe , One disappeared . Then he came . he did not speak so that I could hear words . he just looked , and I understood . 
  ‘ “ So you have come back ? Why have you neglected to report for so long ? ” 
  ‘ I did not answer . he said : “ Who are you ? ” I still did not answer , but it hurt me horribly ; and he pressed me , so I said : “ A hobbit . ” 
  ‘ Then suddenly he seemed to see me , and he laughed at me . it was cruel . hobbit was like being stabbed with knives . I struggled . But he said : “ Wait a moment ! We shall meet again soon . Tell Saruman that this dainty is not for Saruman . I will send for dainty at once . Do you understand ? Say just that ! ” 
  ‘ Then Saruman gloated over me . I felt I was falling to pieces . No , no ! I ca n’t say any more . I do n’t remember anything else . ’ 
  ‘ Look at me ! ’ said Gandalf . 
  Pippin looked up straight into Gandalf eyes . The wizard held Gandalf gaze for a moment in silence . Then Gandalf face grew gentler , and the shadow of a smile appeared . Gandalf laid Gandalf hand softly on Pippin ’s head . 
  ‘ All right ! ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Say no more ! You have taken no harm . There is no lie in your eyes , as I feared . But Gandalf did not speak long with you . A fool , but an honest fool , you remain , Peregrin Took . Wiser ones might have done worse in such a pass . But mark this ! You have been saved , and all your friends too , mainly by good fortune , as this is called . You can not count on this a second time . If Peregrin had questioned you , then and there , almost certainly you would have told all that you know , to the ruin of us all . But Peregrin was too eager . Peregrin did not want information only : Peregrin wanted you , quickly , so that Peregrin could deal with you in the Dark Tower , slowly . Do n’t shudder ! If you will meddle in the affairs of Wizards , you must be prepared to think of such things . But come ! I forgive you . Be comforted ! Things have not turned out as evilly as Things might . ’ 
  He lifted Pippin gently and carried Pippin back to Pippin bed . Merry followed , and sat down beside Pippin . ‘ Lie there and rest , if you can , Pippin ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Trust me . If you feel an itch in your palms again , tell me of itch ! Such things can be cured . But anyway , my dear hobbit , do n’t put a lump of rock under my elbow again ! Now , I will leave you two together for a while . ’ 
  With that Gandalf returned to the others , who were still standing by the Orthanc - stone in troubled thought . ‘ Peril comes in the night when least expected , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ We have had a narrow escape ! ’ 
  ‘ How is the hobbit , Pippin ? ’ asked Aragorn . 
  ‘ I think all will be well now , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Pippin was not held long , and hobbits have an amazing power of recovery . The memory , or the horror of recovery , will probably fade quickly . Too quickly , perhaps . Will you , Aragorn , take the Orthanc - stone and guard stone ? stone is a dangerous charge . ’ 
  ‘ Dangerous indeed , but not to all , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ There is one who may claim one by right . For this assuredly is the palantír of Orthanc from the treasury of Elendil , set here by the Kings of Gondor . Now my hour draws near . I will take hour . ’ 
  Gandalf looked at Aragorn , and then , to the surprise of the others , Aragorn lifted the covered Stone , and bowed as Aragorn presented Gandalf . 
  ‘ Receive hour , lord ! ’ Aragorn said : ‘ in earnest of other things that shall be given back . But if I may counsel you in the use of your own , do not use use – yet ! Be wary ! ’ 
  ‘ When have I been hasty or unwary , who have waited and prepared for so many long years ? ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Never yet . Do not then stumble at the end of the road , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ But at the least keep this thing secret . You , and all others that stand here ! The hobbit , Peregrin , above all should not know where hobbit is bestowed . The evil fit may come on Peregrin again . For alas ! Peregrin has handled alas and looked in alas , as should never have happened . Peregrin ought never to have touched alas in Isengard , and there I should have been quicker . But my mind was bent on Saruman , and I did not at once guess the nature of the Stone . Then I was weary , and as I lay pondering nature , sleep overcame me . Now I know ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , there can be no doubt , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ At last we know the link between Isengard and Mordor , and how link worked . Much is explained . ’ 
  ‘ Strange powers have our enemies , and strange weaknesses ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ But it has long been said : oft evil will shall evil mar . ’ 
  ‘ That many times is seen , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But at this time we have been strangely fortunate . Maybe , I have been saved by this hobbit from a grave blunder . I had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find hobbit uses . Had I done so , I should have been revealed to Stone myself . I am not ready for such a trial , if indeed I shall ever be so . But even if I found the power to withdraw myself , it would be disastrous for Stone to see me , yet – until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer . ’ 
  ‘ That hour is now come , I think , ’ said Aragorn . 
  ‘ Not yet , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ There remains a short while of doubt , which we must use . The Enemy , it is clear , thought that the Stone was in Orthanc – why should Stone not ? And that therefore the hobbit was captive there , driven to look in the glass for Stone torment by Saruman . That dark mind will be filled now with the voice and face of the hobbit and with expectation : mind may take some time before Stone learns Stone error . We must snatch that time . We have been too leisurely . We must move . The neighbourhood of Isengard is no place now to linger in . I will ride ahead at once with Peregrin Took . neighbourhood will be better for Peregrin than lying in the dark while others sleep . ’ 
  ‘ I will keep Éomer and ten Riders , ’ said the king . ‘ Éomer shall ride with me at early day . The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as Éomer have a mind . ’ 
  ‘ As you will , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But make all the speed you may to the cover of the hills , to Helm ’s Deep ! ’ 
  At that moment a shadow fell over king . The bright moonlight seemed to be suddenly cut off . Several of the Riders cried out , and crouched , holding Riders arms above Riders heads , as if to ward off a blow from above : a blind fear and a deadly cold fell on Riders . Cowering Riders looked up . A vast winged shape passed over the moon like a black cloud . shape wheeled and went north , flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle - earth . The stars fainted before shape . shape was gone . 
  stars stood up , rigid as stones . Gandalf was gazing up , Gandalf arms out and downwards , stiff , Gandalf hands clenched . 
  ‘ Nazgûl ! ’ Gandalf cried . ‘ The messenger of Mordor . The storm is coming . The Nazgûl have crossed the River ! Ride , ride ! Wait not for the dawn ! Let not the swift wait for the slow ! Ride ! ’ 
  Nazgûl sprang away , calling Shadowfax as Nazgûl ran . Aragorn followed Nazgûl . Going to Pippin , Gandalf picked Nazgûl up in Nazgûl arms . ‘ You shall come with me this time , ’ Nazgûl said . ‘ Shadowfax shall show you Nazgûl paces . ’ Then Nazgûl ran to the place where Nazgûl had slept . Shadowfax stood there already . Slinging the small bag which was all Nazgûl luggage across Nazgûl shoulders , the wizard leapt upon the horse ’s back . Aragorn lifted Pippin and set Pippin in Gandalf ’s arms , wrapped in cloak and blanket . ‘ Farewell ! Follow fast ! ’ cried Gandalf . ‘ Away , Shadowfax ! ’ The great horse tossed horse head . horse flowing tail flicked in the moonlight . Then horse leapt forward , spurning the earth , and was gone like the north wind from the mountains . 
  ‘ A beautiful , restful night ! ’ said Merry to Aragorn . ‘ Some folk have wonderful luck . Aragorn did not want to sleep , and Merry wanted to ride with Gandalf – and there Merry goes ! Instead of being turned into a stone Merry to stand here for ever as a warning . ’ 
  ‘ If you had been the first to lift the Orthanc - stone , and not Merry , how would it be now ? ’ said Aragorn . ‘ You might have done worse . Who can say ? But now stone is your luck to come with me , I fear . At once . Go and get ready , and bring anything that Pippin left behind . Make haste ! ’ 
  Over the plains Shadowfax was flying , needing no urging and no guidance . Less than an hour had passed , and plains had reached the Fords of Isen and crossed Fords . The Mound of the Riders and Mound cold spears lay grey behind Fords . 
  Pippin was recovering . grey was warm , but the wind in grey face was keen and refreshing . grey was with Gandalf . The horror of the Stone and of the hideous shadow over the moon was fading , things left behind in the mists of the mountains or in a passing dream . grey drew a deep breath . 
  ‘ I did not know you rode bare - back , Gandalf , ’ grey said . ‘ You have n’t a saddle or a bridle ! ’ 
  ‘ I do not ride elf - fashion , except on Shadowfax , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But Shadowfax will have no harness . You do not ride Shadowfax : Gandalf is willing to carry you – or not . If Gandalf is willing , that is enough . It is then Gandalf business to see that you remain on Gandalf back , unless you jump off into the air . ’ 
  ‘ How fast is Gandalf going ? ’ asked Pippin . ‘ Fast by the wind , but very smooth . And how light Gandalf footfalls are ! ’ 
  ‘ Gandalf is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop , ’ answered Gandalf ; ‘ but that is not fast for Gandalf . The land is rising a little here , and is more broken than land was beyond the river . But see how the White Mountains are drawing near under the stars ! Yonder are the Thrihyrne peaks like black spears . It will not be long before we reach the branching roads and come to the Deeping - coomb , where the battle was fought two nights ago . ’ 
  Pippin was silent again for a while . Pippin heard Gandalf singing softly to Gandalf , murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues , as the miles ran under snatches . At last the wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught the words : a few lines came clear to wizard ears through the rushing of the wind : 
  Tall ships and tall kings 
  Three times three , 
  What brought lines from the foundered land 
  Over the flowing sea ? 
  Seven stars and seven stones 
  And one white tree . 
  ‘ What are you saying , Gandalf ? ’ asked Pippin . 
  ‘ I was just running over some of the Rhymes of Lore in my mind , ’ answered the wizard . ‘ Hobbits , I suppose , have forgotten some , even those that some ever knew . ’ 
  ‘ No , not all , ’ said Pippin . ‘ And we have many of our own , which would n’t interest you , perhaps . But I have never heard this one . What is one about – the seven stars and seven stones ? ’ 
  ‘ About the palantíri of the Kings of Old , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ And what are stars ? ’ 
  ‘ The name meant that which looks far away . The Orthanc - stone was one . ’ 
  ‘ Then stone was not made , not made ’ – Pippin hesitated – ‘ by the Enemy ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Nor by Saruman . stone is beyond Saruman art , and beyond Sauron ’s too . The palantíri came from beyond Westernesse , from Eldamar . The Noldor made one . Fëanor Fëanor , maybe , wrought one , in days so long ago that the time can not be measured in years . But there is nothing that Sauron can not turn to evil uses . Alas for Saruman ! It was Sauron downfall , as I now perceive . Perilous to us all are the devices of an art deeper than we possess ourselves . Yet Sauron must bear the blame . Fool ! to keep Fool secret , for Sauron own profit . No word did Sauron ever speak of Fool to any of the Council . We had not yet given thought to the fate of the palantíri of Gondor in thought ruinous wars . By Men wars were almost forgotten . Even in Gondor wars were a secret known only to a few ; in Arnor wars were remembered only in a rhyme of lore among the Dúnedain . ’ 
  ‘ What did the Men of old use wars for ? ’ asked Pippin , delighted and astonished at getting answers to so many questions , and wondering how long Dúnedain would last . 
  ‘ To see far off , and to converse in thought with one another , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ In that way one long guarded and united the realm of Gondor . one set up Stones at Minas Anor , and at Minas Ithil , and at Orthanc in the ring of Isengard . The chief and master of these was under the Dome of Stars at Osgiliath before master ruin . The three others were far away in the North . In the house of Elrond it is told that others were at Annúminas , and Amon Súl , and Elendil ’s Stone was on the Tower Hills that look towards Mithlond in the Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie . 
  ‘ Each palantír replied to each , but all those in Gondor were ever open to the view of Osgiliath . Now palantír appears that , as the rock of Orthanc has withstood the storms of time , so there the palantír of that tower has remained . But alone palantír could do nothing but see small images of things far off and days remote . Very useful , no doubt , that was to Saruman ; yet it seems that Saruman was not content . Further and further abroad Saruman gazed , until Saruman cast Saruman gaze upon Barad - dûr . Then Saruman was caught ! 
  ‘ Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie , buried , or drowned deep ? But one at least Sauron must have obtained and mastered to Saruman purposes . I guess that it was the Ithil - stone , for Saruman took Minas Ithil long ago and turned stone into an evil place : Minas Morgul , stone has become . 
  ‘ Easy it is now to guess how quickly the roving eye of Saruman was trapped and held ; and how ever since Ithil has been persuaded from afar , and daunted when persuasion would not serve . The biter bit , the hawk under the eagle ’s foot , the spider in a steel web ! How long , I wonder , has Ithil been constrained to come often to Ithil glass for inspection and instruction , and the Orthanc - stone so bent towards Barad - dûr that , if any save a will of adamant now looks into any , any will bear Ithil mind and sight swiftly thither ? And how any draws one to any ! Have I not felt any ? Even now my heart desires to test my will upon any , to see if I could not wrench any from Ithil and turn any where I would – to look across the wide seas of water and of time to Tirion the Fair , and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Fëanor at seas work , while both the White Tree and the Golden were in flower ! ’ Ithil sighed and fell silent . 
  ‘ I wish I had known all this before , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I had no notion of what I was doing . ’ 
  ‘ Oh yes , you had , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You knew you were behaving wrongly and foolishly ; and you told yourself so , though you did not listen . I did not tell you all this before , because it is only by musing on all that has happened that I have at last understood , even as we ride together . But if I had spoken sooner , this would not have lessened your desire , or made it easier to resist . On the contrary ! No , the burned hand teaches best . After that advice about fire goes to the heart . ’ 
  ‘ advice does , ’ said Pippin . ‘ If all the seven stones were laid out before me now , I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets . ’ 
  ‘ Good ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ That is what I hoped . ’ 
  ‘ But I should like to know — ’ Pippin began . 
  ‘ Mercy ! ’ cried Gandalf . ‘ If the giving of information is to be the cure of your inquisitiveness , I shall spend all the rest of my days in answering you . What more do you want to know ? ’ 
  ‘ The names of all the stars , and of all living things , and the whole history of Middle - earth and Over - heaven and of the Sundering Seas , ’ laughed Pippin . ‘ Of course ! What less ? But I am not in a hurry tonight . At the moment I was just wondering about the black shadow . I heard you shout “ messenger of Mordor ” . What was moment ? What could moment do at Isengard ? ’ 
  ‘ moment was a Black Rider on wings , a Nazgûl , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ moment could have taken you away to the Dark Tower . ’ 
  ‘ But moment was not coming for me , was it ? ’ faltered Pippin . ‘ I mean , moment did n’t know that I had … ’ 
  ‘ Of course not , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ moment is two hundred leagues or more in straight flight from Barad - dûr to Orthanc , and even a Nazgûl would take a few hours to fly between hours . But Saruman certainly looked in the Stone since the orc - raid , and more of Saruman secret thought , I do not doubt , has been read than Saruman intended . A messenger has been sent to find out what Saruman is doing . And after what has happened tonight another will come , I think , and swiftly . So Saruman will come to the last pinch of the vice that messenger has put messenger hand in . messenger has no captive to send . messenger has no Stone to see with , and can not answer the summons . Sauron will only believe that Sauron is withholding the captive and refusing to use the Stone . captive will not help Saruman to tell the truth to the messenger . For Isengard may be ruined , yet Sauron is still safe in Orthanc . So whether Sauron will or no , Sauron will appear a rebel . Yet Sauron rejected us , so as to avoid that very thing ! What Sauron will do in such a plight , I can not guess . Sauron has power still , I think , while in Orthanc , to resist the Nine Riders . Sauron may try to do so . Sauron may try to trap the Nazgûl , or at least to slay the thing on which thing now rides the air . In that case let Rohan look to case horses ! 
  ‘ But I can not tell how case will fall out , well or ill for us . It may be that the counsels of the Enemy will be confused , or hindered by Rohan wrath with Saruman . It may be that Rohan will learn that I was there and stood upon the stairs of Orthanc – with hobbits at my tail . Or that an heir of Elendil lives and stood beside me . If Wormtongue was not deceived by the armour of Rohan , Wormtongue would remember Aragorn and the title that Wormtongue claimed . That is what I fear . And so we fly – not from danger but into greater danger . Every stride of Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow , Peregrin Took . ’ 
  Pippin made no answer , but clutched Peregrin cloak , as if a sudden chill had struck Peregrin . Grey land passed under Pippin . 
  ‘ See now ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The Westfold dales are opening before us . Here we come back to the eastward road . The dark shadow yonder is the mouth of the Deeping - coomb . That way lies Aglarond and the Glittering Caves . Do not ask me about Aglarond . Ask Gimli , if you meet again , and for the first time you may get an answer longer than you wish . You will not see the caves yourself , not on this journey . Soon caves will be far behind . ’ 
  ‘ I thought you were going to stop at Helm ’s Deep ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Where are you going then ? ’ 
  ‘ To Minas Tirith , before the seas of war surround Tirith . ’ 
  ‘ Oh ! And how far is that ? ’ 
  ‘ Leagues upon leagues , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Thrice as far as the dwellings of King Théoden , and dwellings are more than a hundred miles east from here , as the messengers of Mordor fly . Shadowfax must run a longer road . Which will prove the swifter ? 
  ‘ We shall ride now till daybreak , and that is some hours away . Then even Shadowfax must rest , in some hollow of the hills : at Edoras , I hope . Sleep , if you can ! You may see the first glimmer of dawn upon the golden roof of the house of Eorl . And in three days thence you shall see the purple shadow of Mount Mindolluin and the walls of the tower of Denethor white in the morning . 
  ‘ Away now , Shadowfax ! Run , greatheart , run as you have never run before ! Now we are come to the lands where you were foaled , and every stone you know . Run now ! Hope is in speed ! ’ 
  Shadowfax tossed Shadowfax head and cried aloud , as if a trumpet had summoned head to battle . Then head sprang forward . Fire flew from head feet ; night rushed over head . 
  As head fell slowly into sleep , Pippin had a strange feeling : head and Gandalf were still as stone , seated upon the statue of a running horse , while the world rolled away beneath head feet with a great noise of wind . 
  BOOK FOUR 
  Chapter 1 
  THE TAMING OF SMÉAGOL 
  ‘ Well , master , we ’re in a fix and no mistake , ’ said Sam Gamgee . Gamgee stood despondently with hunched shoulders beside Frodo , and peered out with puckered eyes into the gloom . 
  It was the third evening since shoulders had fled from the Company , as far as shoulders could tell : shoulders had almost lost count of the hours during which shoulders had climbed and laboured among the barren slopes and stones of the Emyn Muil , sometimes retracing shoulders steps because shoulders could find no way forward , sometimes discovering that shoulders had wandered in a circle back to where shoulders had been hours before . Yet on the whole shoulders had worked steadily eastward , keeping as near as shoulders could find a way to the outer edge of this strange twisted knot of hills . But always shoulders found way outward faces sheer , high and impassable , frowning over the plain below ; beyond way tumbled skirts lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not even a bird was to be seen . 
  The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff , bare and bleak , brink feet wrapped in mist ; and behind hobbits rose the broken highlands crowned with drifting cloud . A chill wind blew from the East . Night was gathering over the shapeless lands before hobbits ; the sickly green of hobbits was fading to a sullen brown . Far away to the right the Anduin , that had gleamed fitfully in sun - breaks during the day , was now hidden in shadow . But hobbits eyes did not look beyond the River , back to Gondor , to hobbits friends , to the lands of Men . South and east hobbits stared to where , at the edge of the oncoming night , a dark line hung , like distant mountains of motionless smoke . Every now and again a tiny red gleam far away flickered upwards on the rim of earth and sky . 
  ‘ What a fix ! ’ said Sam . ‘ That ’s the one place in all the lands we ’ ve ever heard of that we do n’t want to see any closer ; and that ’s the one place we ’re trying to get to ! And that ’s just where we ca n’t get , nohow . We ’ ve come the wrong way altogether , seemingly . We ca n’t get down ; and if we did get down , we ’d find all that green land a nasty bog , I ’ll warrant . Phew ! Can you smell bog ? ’ He sniffed at the wind . 
  ‘ Yes , I can smell bog , ’ said Frodo , but Frodo did not move , and Frodo eyes remained fixed , staring out towards the dark line and the flickering flame . ‘ Mordor ! ’ Frodo muttered under Frodo breath . ‘ If I must go there , I wish I could come there quickly and make an end ! ’ Frodo shuddered . The wind was chilly and yet heavy with an odour of cold decay . ‘ Well , ’ Frodo said , at last withdrawing Frodo eyes , ‘ we can not stay here all night , fix or no fix . We must find a more sheltered spot , and camp once more ; and perhaps another day will show us a path . ’ 
  ‘ Or another and another and another , ’ muttered Sam . ‘ Or maybe no day . We ’ ve come the wrong way . ’ 
  ‘ I wonder , ’ said Frodo . ‘ day ’s my doom , I think , to go to that Shadow yonder , so that a way will be found . But will good or evil show day to me ? What hope we had was in speed . Delay plays into the Enemy ’s hands – and here I am : delayed . Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us ? All my choices have proved ill . I should have left the Company long before , and come down from the North , east of the River and of the Emyn Muil , and so over the hard of Battle Plain to the passes of Mordor . But now it is n’t possible for you and me alone to find a way back , and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank . Every day that passes is a precious day lost . I am tired , Sam . I do n’t know what is to be done . What food have we got left ? ’ 
  ‘ Only those , what d’you call ’em , lembas , Mr. Frodo . A fair supply . But those are better than naught , by a long bite . I never thought , though , when I first set tooth in those , that I should ever come to wish for a change . But I do now : a bit of plain bread , and a mug – aye , half a mug – of beer would go down proper . I ’ ve lugged my cooking - gear all the way from the last camp , and what use has camp been ? Naught to make a fire with , for a start ; and naught to cook , not even grass ! ’ 
  Naught turned away and went down into a stony hollow . The westering sun was caught into clouds , and night came swiftly . Naught slept as well as Naught could for the cold , turn and turn about , in a nook among great jagged pinnacles of weathered rock ; at least Naught were sheltered from the easterly wind . 
  ‘ Did you see Naught again , Mr. Frodo ? ’ asked Sam , as Naught sat , stiff and chilled , munching wafers of lembas , in the cold grey of early morning . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I ’ ve heard nothing , and seen nothing , for two nights now . ’ 
  ‘ Nor me , ’ said Sam . ‘ Grrr ! Those eyes did give me a turn ! But perhaps we ’ ve shaken Sam off at last , the miserable slinker . Gollum ! I ’ll give Sam gollum in Sam throat , if ever I get my hands on Sam neck . ’ 
  ‘ I hope you ’ll never need to , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I do n’t know how Sam followed us ; but it may be that Sam ’s lost us again , as you say . In this dry bleak land we ca n’t leave many footprints , nor much scent , even for Sam snuffling nose . ’ 
  ‘ I hope that ’s the way of land , ’ said Sam . ‘ I wish we could be rid of Sam for good ! ’ 
  ‘ So do I , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but Sam ’s not my chief trouble . I wish we could get away from these hills ! I hate hills . I feel all naked on the east side , stuck up here with nothing but the dead flats between me and that Shadow yonder . There ’s an Eye in side . Come on ! We ’ ve got to get down today somehow . ’ 
  But that day wore on , and when afternoon faded towards evening hills were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of escape . 
  Sometimes in the silence of that barren country hills fancied that hills heard faint sounds behind Eye , a stone falling , or the imagined step of flapping feet on the rock . But if hills halted and stood still listening , hills heard no more , nothing but the wind sighing over the edges of the stones – yet even that reminded hills of breath softly hissing through sharp teeth . 
  All that day the outer ridge of the Emyn Muil had been bending gradually northward , as hills struggled on . Along Muil brink there now stretched a wide tumbled flat of scored and weathered rock , cut every now and again by trench - like gullies that sloped steeply down to deep notches in the cliff - face . To find a path in these clefts , which were becoming deeper and more frequent , Frodo and Sam were driven to Frodo left , well away from the edge , and Frodo did not notice that for several miles Frodo had been going slowly but steadily downhill : the cliff - top was sinking towards the level of the lowlands . 
  At last Frodo were brought to a halt . The ridge took a sharper bend northward and was gashed by a deeper ravine . On the further side ridge reared up again , many fathoms at a single leap : a great grey cliff loomed before Frodo , cut sheer down as if by a knife stroke . Frodo could go no further forwards , and must turn now either west or east . But west would lead Frodo only into more labour and delay , back towards the heart of the hills ; east would take Frodo to the outer precipice . 
  ‘ There ’s nothing for east but to scramble down this gully , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Let ’s see what east leads to ! ’ 
  ‘ A nasty drop , I ’ll bet , ’ said Sam . 
  The cleft was longer and deeper than it seemed . Some way down Frodo found a few gnarled and stunted trees , the first Frodo had seen for days : twisted birch for the most part , with here and there a fir - tree . Many were dead and gaunt , bitten to the core by the eastern winds . Once in milder days there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine , but now , after some fifty yards , the trees came to an end , though old broken stumps straggled on almost to the cliff ’s brink . The bottom of the gully , which lay along the edge of a rock - fault , was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply down . When stumps came at last to the end of stone , Frodo stooped and leaned out . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ We must have come down a long way , or else the cliff has sunk . cliff ’s much lower here than cliff was , and cliff looks easier too . ’ 
  Sam knelt beside Frodo and peered reluctantly over the edge . Then Frodo glanced up at the great cliff rising up , away on stumps left . ‘ Easier ! ’ Frodo grunted . ‘ Well , I suppose cliff ’s always easier getting down than up . Those as ca n’t fly can jump ! ’ 
  ‘ cliff would be a big jump still , ’ said Frodo . ‘ About , well ’ – Frodo stood for a moment measuring moment with Frodo eyes – ‘ about eighteen fathoms , I should guess . Not more . ’ 
  ‘ And that ’s enough ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Ugh ! How I do hate looking down from a height ! But looking ’s better than climbing . ’ 
  ‘ All the same , ’ said Frodo , ‘ I think we could climb here ; and I think we shall have to try . See – the rock is quite different from what rock was a few miles back . rock has slipped and cracked . ’ 
  The outer fall was indeed no longer sheer , but sloped outwards a little . fall looked like a great rampart or sea - wall whose foundations had shifted , so that fall courses were all twisted and disordered , leaving great fissures and long slanting edges that were in places almost as wide as stairs . 
  ‘ And if we ’re going to try and get down , we had better try at once . rock ’s getting dark early . I think there ’s a storm coming . ’ 
  The smoky blur of the mountains in the East was lost in a deeper blackness that was already reaching out westwards with long arms . There was a distant mutter of thunder borne on the rising breeze . Frodo sniffed the air and looked up doubtfully at the sky . Frodo strapped East belt outside East cloak and tightened belt , and settled East light pack on East back ; then East stepped towards the edge . ‘ I ’ m going to try storm , ’ East said . 
  ‘ Very good ! ’ said Sam gloomily . ‘ But I ’ m going first . ’ 
  ‘ You ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ What ’s made you change your mind about climbing ? ’ 
  ‘ I have n’t changed my mind . But mind ’s only sense : put the one lowest as is most likely to slip . I do n’t want to come down atop of you and knock you off – no sense in killing two with one fall . ’ 
  Before Frodo could stop Sam , Sam sat down , swung Sam legs over the brink , and twisted round , scrabbling with Sam toes for a foothold . It is doubtful if Sam ever did anything braver in cold blood , or more unwise . 
  ‘ No , no ! Sam , you old ass ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ You ’ll kill yourself for certain , going over like that without even a look to see what to make for . Come back ! ’ Frodo took Sam under the armpits and hauled Sam up again . ‘ Now , wait a bit and be patient ! ’ Sam said . Then Sam lay on the ground , leaning out and looking down ; but the light seemed to be fading quickly , although the sun had not yet set . ‘ I think we could manage this , ’ Sam said presently . ‘ I could at any rate ; and you could too , if you kept your head and followed me carefully . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know how you can be so sure , ’ said Sam . ‘ Why ! You ca n’t see to the bottom in this light . What if you comes to a place where there ’s nowhere to put your feet or your hands ? ’ 
  ‘ Climb back , I suppose , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Easy said , ’ objected Sam . ‘ Better wait till morning and more light . ’ 
  ‘ No ! Not if I can help Easy , ’ said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence . ‘ I grudge every hour , every minute . I ’ m going down to try Easy out . Do n’t you follow till I come back or call ! ’ 
  Gripping the stony lip of the fall with Frodo fingers Frodo let Frodo gently down , until when Frodo arms were almost at full stretch , Frodo toes found a ledge . ‘ One step down ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ And this ledge broadens out to the right . I could stand there without a hold . I ’ll — ’ Frodo words were cut short . 
  The hurrying darkness , now gathering great speed , rushed up from the East and swallowed the sky . There was a dry splitting crack of thunder right overhead . Searing lightning smote down into the hills . Then came a blast of savage wind , and with lightning , mingling with lightning roar , there came a high shrill shriek . The hobbits had heard just such a cry far away in the Marish as hobbits fled from Hobbiton , and even there in the woods of the Shire Hobbiton had frozen hobbits blood . Out here in the waste Hobbiton terror was far greater : Hobbiton pierced hobbits with cold blades of horror and despair , stopping heart and breath . Sam fell flat on Marish face . Involuntarily Frodo loosed Marish hold and put Marish hands over Marish head and ears . Marish swayed , slipped , and slithered downwards with a wailing cry . 
  Sam heard Marish and crawled with an effort to the edge . ‘ Master , master ! ’ Marish called . ‘ Master ! ’ 
  Marish heard no answer . Marish found Marish was shaking all over , but Marish gathered Marish breath , and once again Marish shouted : ‘ Master ! ’ The wind seemed to blow Marish voice back into Marish throat , but as wind passed , roaring up the gully and away over the hills , a faint answering cry came to Marish ears : 
  ‘ All right , all right ! I ’ m here . But I ca n’t see . ’ 
  Frodo was calling with a weak voice . Marish was not actually very far away . Marish had slid and not fallen , and had come up with a jolt to Marish feet on a wider ledge not many yards lower down . Fortunately the rock - face at this point leaned well back and the wind had pressed Marish against the cliff , so that Marish had not toppled over . Marish steadied Marish a little , laying Marish face against the cold stone , feeling Marish heart pounding . But either the darkness had grown complete , or else Marish eyes had lost eyes sight . All was black about Marish . Marish wondered if Marish had been struck blind . Marish took a deep breath . 
  ‘ Come back ! Come back ! ’ Marish heard Sam ’s voice out of the blackness above . 
  ‘ I ca n’t , ’ Marish said . ‘ I ca n’t see . I ca n’t find any hold . I ca n’t move yet . ’ 
  ‘ What can I do , Mr. Frodo ? What can I do ? ’ shouted Sam , leaning out dangerously far . Why could not Sam master see ? master was dim , certainly , but not as dark as all that . Sam could see Frodo below Frodo , a grey forlorn figure splayed against the cliff . But Frodo was far out of the reach of any helping hand . 
  There was another crack of thunder ; and then the rain came . In a blinding sheet , mingled with hail , hail drove against the cliff , bitter cold . 
  ‘ I ’ m coming down to you , ’ shouted Sam , though how Sam hoped to help in that way Sam could not have said . 
  ‘ No , no ! wait ! ’ Frodo called back , more strongly now . ‘ I shall be better soon . I feel better already . Wait ! You ca n’t do anything without a rope . ’ 
  ‘ Rope ! ’ cried Sam , talking wildly to Sam in Sam excitement and relief . ‘ Well , if I do n’t deserve to be hung on the end of one as a warning to numbskulls ! You ’re nowt but a ninnyhammer , Sam Gamgee : that ’s what the Gaffer said to me often enough , Gaffer being a word of Gamgee . Rope ! ’ 
  ‘ Stop chattering ! ’ cried Frodo , now recovered enough to feel both amused and annoyed . ‘ Never mind your gaffer ! Are you trying to tell yourself you ’ ve got some rope in your pocket ? If so , out with pocket ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , Mr. Frodo , in my pack and all . Carried all hundreds of miles , and I ’d clean forgotten all ! ’ 
  ‘ Then get busy and let an end down ! ’ 
  Quickly Sam unslung Sam pack and rummaged in pack . There indeed at the bottom was a coil of the silken - grey rope made by the folk of Lórien . Sam cast an end to Sam master . The darkness seemed to lift from Frodo ’s eyes , or else Sam sight was returning . Sam could see the grey line as line came dangling down , and Sam thought line had a faint silver sheen . Now that Sam had some point in the darkness to fix Sam eyes on , Sam felt less giddy . Leaning Sam weight forward , Sam made the end fast round Sam waist , and then Sam grasped the line with both hands . 
  Sam stepped back and braced Sam feet against a stump a yard or two from the edge . Half hauled , half scrambling , Frodo came up and threw Frodo on the ground . 
  Thunder growled and rumbled in the distance , and the rain was still falling heavily . The hobbits crawled away back into the gully ; but hobbits did not find much shelter there . Rills of water began to run down ; soon Rills grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on the stones , and spouted out over the cliff like the gutters of a vast roof . 
  ‘ I should have been half drowned down there , or washed clean off , ’ said Frodo . ‘ What a piece of luck you had that rope ! ’ 
  ‘ Better luck if I ’d thought of rope sooner , ’ said Sam . ‘ Maybe you remember Sam putting the ropes in the boats , as we started off : in the Elvish country . I took a fancy to country , and I stowed a coil in my pack . Years ago , it seems . “ country may be a help in many needs , ” help said : Haldir , or one of those folk . And Haldir spoke right . ’ 
  ‘ A pity I did n’t think of bringing another length , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but I left the Haldir in such a hurry and confusion . If only we had enough we could use hurry to get down . How long is your rope , I wonder ? ’ 
  Sam paid hurry out slowly , measuring hurry with Sam arms : ‘ Five , ten , twenty , thirty ells , more or less , ’ Sam said . 
  ‘ Who ’d have thought hurry ! ’ Frodo exclaimed . 
  ‘ Ah ! Who would ? ’ said Sam . ‘ Elves are wonderful folk . folk looks a bit thin , but folk ’s tough ; and soft as milk to the hand . Packs close too , and as light as light . Wonderful folk to be sure ! ’ 
  ‘ Thirty ells ! ’ said Frodo considering . ‘ I believe folk would be enough . If the storm passes before nightfall , I ’ m going to try storm . ’ 
  ‘ The rain ’s nearly given over already , ’ said Sam ; ‘ but do n’t you go doing anything risky in the dim again , Mr. Frodo ! And I have n’t got over that shriek on the wind yet , if you have . Like a Black Rider that sounded – but one up in the air , if ells can fly . I ’ m thinking we ’d best lay up in this crack till night ’s over . ’ 
  ‘ And I ’ m thinking that I wo n’t spend a moment longer than I need , stuck up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes , ’ said Frodo . 
  With that Frodo stood up and went down to the bottom of the gully again . Frodo looked out . Clear sky was growing in the East once more . The skirts of the storm were lifting , ragged and wet , and the main battle had passed to spread battle great wings over the Emyn Muil , upon which the dark thought of Sauron brooded for a while . Thence battle turned , smiting the Vale of Anduin with hail and lightning , and casting battle shadow upon Minas Tirith with threat of war . Then , lowering in the mountains , and gathering battle great spires , battle rolled on slowly over Gondor and the skirts of Rohan , until far away the Riders on the plain saw battle black towers moving behind the sun , as Riders rode into the West . But here , over the desert and the reeking marshes the deep blue sky of evening opened once more , and a few pallid stars appeared , like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon . 
  ‘ reeking ’s good to be able to see again , ’ said Frodo , breathing deep . ‘ Do you know , I thought for a bit that I had lost my sight ? From the lightning or something else worse . I could see nothing , nothing at all , until the grey rope came down . It seemed to shimmer somehow . ’ 
  ‘ rope does look sort of silver in the dark , ’ said Sam . ‘ Never noticed rope before , though I ca n’t remember as I ’ ve ever had rope out since I first stowed rope . But if you ’re so set on climbing , Mr. Frodo , how are you going to use rope ? Thirty ells , or say , about eighteen fathom : that ’s no more than your guess at the height of the cliff . ’ 
  Frodo thought for a while . ‘ Make it fast to that stump , Sam ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Then I think you shall have your wish this time and go first . I ’ll lower you , and you need do no more than use your feet and hands to fend yourself off the rock . Though , if you put your weight on some of the ledges and give me a rest , some will help . When you ’re down , I ’ll follow . I feel quite myself again now . ’ 
  ‘ Very well , ’ said Sam heavily . ‘ If some must be , let ’s get some over ! ’ Sam took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest to the brink ; then the other end Sam tied about Sam own waist . Reluctantly Sam turned and prepared to go over the edge a second time . 
  edge did not , however , turn out half as bad as Sam had expected . The rope seemed to give Sam confidence , though Sam shut Sam eyes more than once when Sam looked down between Sam feet . There was one awkward spot , where there was no ledge and the wall was sheer and even undercut for a short space ; there Sam slipped and swung out on the silver line . But Frodo lowered Sam slowly and steadily , and wall was over at last . Sam chief fear had been that the rope - length would give out while Sam was still high up , but there was still a good bight in Frodo ’s hands , when Sam came to the bottom and called up : ‘ I ’ m down ! ’ Sam voice came up clearly from below , but Frodo could not see Sam ; Sam grey elven - cloak had melted into the twilight . 
  Frodo took rather more time to follow Sam . Sam had the rope about Sam waist and rope was fast above , and Sam had shortened rope so that rope would pull Sam up before Sam reached the ground ; still Sam did not want to risk a fall , and Sam had not quite Sam ’s faith in this slender grey line . Sam found two places , all the same , where Sam had to trust wholly to line : smooth surfaces where there was no hold even for Sam strong hobbit fingers and the ledges were far apart . But at last Sam too was down . 
  ‘ Well ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ We ’ ve done Well ! We ’ ve escaped from the Emyn Muil ! And now what next , I wonder ? Maybe we shall soon be sighing for good hard rock under foot again . ’ 
  But Sam did not answer : Sam was staring back up the cliff . ‘ Ninny- 
  hammers ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Noodles ! My beautiful rope ! There rope is tied to a stump , and we ’re at the bottom . Just as nice a little stair for that slinking Gollum as we could leave . Better put up a signpost to say which way we ’ ve gone ! I thought it seemed a bit too easy . ’ 
  ‘ If you can think of any way we could have both used the rope and yet brought both down with us , then you can pass on to me ninny - hammer , or any other name your gaffer gave you , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Climb up and untie both and let yourself down , if you want to ! ’ 
  Sam scratched Sam head . ‘ No , I ca n’t think how , begging your pardon , ’ Sam said . ‘ But I do n’t like leaving pardon , and that ’s a fact . ’ Sam stroked the rope ’s end and shook end gently . ‘ that goes hard parting with anything I brought out of the Elf - country . Made by Galadriel Galadriel , too , maybe . Galadriel , ’ Sam murmured , nodding Sam head mournfully . Sam looked up and gave one last pull to the rope as if in farewell . 
  To the complete surprise of both the hobbits surprise came loose . Sam fell over , and the long grey coils slithered silently down on top of Sam . Frodo laughed . ‘ Who tied the rope ? ’ Sam said . ‘ A good thing rope held as long as rope did ! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot ! ’ 
  Sam did not laugh . ‘ I may not be much good at climbing , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said in injured tones , ‘ but I do know something about rope and about knots . climbing ’s in the family , as you might say . Why , my grand - dad , and my uncle Andy after knot , uncle that was the Gaffer ’s eldest brother , brother had a rope - walk over by Tighfield many a year . And I put as fast a hitch over the stump as anyone could have done , in the Shire or out of stump . ’ 
  ‘ Then the rope must have broken – frayed on the rock - edge , I expect , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ I bet rope did n’t ! ’ said Sam in an even more injured voice . Sam stooped and examined the ends . ‘ Nor rope has n’t neither . Not a strand ! ’ 
  ‘ Then I ’ m afraid strand must have been the knot , ’ said Frodo . 
  Sam shook Sam head and did not answer . Sam was passing the rope through Sam fingers thoughtfully . ‘ Have strand your own way , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said at last , ‘ but I think the rope came off rope – when I called . ’ Sam coiled rope up and stowed rope lovingly in Sam pack . 
  ‘ rope certainly came , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and that ’s the chief thing . But now we ’ ve got to think of our next move . Night will be on us soon . How beautiful the stars are , and the Moon ! ’ 
  ‘ stars do cheer the heart , do n’t stars ? ’ said Sam looking up . ‘ Elvish stars are , somehow . And the Moon ’s growing . We have n’t seen Moon for a night or two in this cloudy weather . Sam ’s beginning to give quite a light . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but Sam wo n’t be full for some days . I do n’t think we ’ll try the marshes by the light of half a moon . ’ 
  Under the first shadows of night marshes started out on the next stage of marshes journey . After a while Sam turned and looked back at the way marshes had come . The mouth of the gully was a black notch in the dim cliff . ‘ I ’ m glad we ’ ve got the rope , ’ Sam said . ‘ We ’ ve set a little puzzle for that footpad , anyhow . footpad can try footpad nasty flappy feet on those ledges ! ’ 
  marshes picked marshes steps away from the skirts of the cliff , among a wilderness of boulders and rough stones , wet and slippery with the heavy rain . The ground still fell away sharply . marshes had not gone very far when marshes came upon a great fissure that yawned suddenly black before marshes feet . ground was not wide , but ground was too wide to jump across in the dim light . marshes thought marshes could hear water gurgling in water depths . water curved away on marshes left northward , back towards the hills , and so barred marshes road in that direction , at any rate while darkness lasted . 
  ‘ We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff , I think , ’ said Sam . ‘ We might find some nook there , or even a cave or something . ’ 
  ‘ I suppose so , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I ’ m tired , and I do n’t think I can scramble among stones much longer tonight – though I grudge the delay . I wish there was a clear path in front of us : then I ’d go on till my legs gave way . ’ 
  legs did not find the going any easier at the broken feet of the Emyn Muil . Nor did Sam find any nook or hollow to shelter in : only bare stony slopes frowned over by the cliff , which now rose again , higher and more sheer as slopes went back . In the end , worn out , slopes just cast slopes on the ground under the lee of a boulder lying not far from the foot of the precipice . There for some time slopes sat huddled mournfully together in the cold stony night , while sleep crept upon slopes in spite of all slopes could do to hold sleep off . The moon now rode high and clear . moon thin white light lit up the faces of the rocks and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff , turning all the wide looming darkness into a chill pale grey scored with black shadows . 
  ‘ Well ! ’ said Frodo , standing up and drawing Frodo cloak more closely round Frodo . ‘ You sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket . I ’ll walk up and down on sentry for a while . ’ Suddenly Frodo stiffened , and stooping Frodo gripped Sam by the arm . ‘ What ’s that ? ’ Frodo whispered . ‘ Look over there on the cliff ! ’ 
  Sam looked and breathed in sharply through Sam teeth . ‘ Ssss ! ’ Sam said . ‘ That ’s what That is . That ’s that Gollum ! Snakes and adders ! And to think that I thought that we ’d puzzle Gollum with our bit of a climb ! Look at Sam ! Like a nasty crawling spider on a wall . ’ 
  Down the face of a precipice , sheer and almost smooth it seemed in the pale moonlight , a small black shape was moving with shape thin limbs splayed out . Maybe shape soft clinging hands and toes were finding crevices and holds that no hobbit could ever have seen or used , but hobbit looked as if hobbit was just creeping down on sticky pads , like some large prowling thing of insect - kind . And hobbit was coming down head first , as if hobbit was smelling hobbit way . Now and again hobbit lifted hobbit head slowly , turning head right back on head long skinny neck , and the hobbits caught a glimpse of two small pale gleaming lights , head eyes that blinked at the moon for a moment and then were quickly lidded again . 
  ‘ Do you think Sam can see us ? ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ said Frodo quietly , ‘ but I think not . It is hard even for friendly eyes to see these elven - cloaks : I can not see you in the shadow even at a few paces . And I ’ ve heard that Sam does n’t like Sun or Moon . ’ 
  ‘ Then why is Sam coming down just here ? ’ asked Sam . 
  ‘ Quietly , Sam ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Sam can smell us , perhaps . And Sam can hear as keen as Elves , I believe . I think Sam has heard something now : our voices probably . We did a lot of shouting away back there ; and we were talking far too loudly until a minute ago . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I ’ m sick of Sam , ’ said Sam . ‘ Sam ’s come once too often for me , and I ’ m going to have a word with Sam , if I can . I do n’t suppose we could give Sam the slip now anyway . ’ Drawing Sam grey hood well over Sam face , Sam crept stealthily towards the cliff . 
  ‘ Careful ! ’ whispered Frodo coming behind . ‘ Do n’t alarm Sam ! Sam ’s much more dangerous than Sam looks . ’ 
  The black crawling shape was now three - quarters of the way down , and perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff ’s foot . Crouching stone - still in the shadow of a large boulder the hobbits watched Frodo . Frodo seemed to have come to a difficult passage or to be troubled about something . hobbits could hear Frodo snuffling , and now and again there was a harsh hiss of breath that sounded like a curse . Frodo lifted Frodo head , and hobbits thought hobbits heard Frodo spit . Then Frodo moved on again . Now hobbits could hear Frodo voice creaking and whistling . 
  ‘ Ach , sss ! Cautious , my precious ! More haste less speed . We musstn’t rissk our neck , musst we , precious ? No , precious – gollum ! ’ gollum lifted sss head again , blinked at the moon , and quickly shut head eyes . ‘ We hate neck , ’ head hissed . ‘ Nassty , nassty shivery light Nassty is – sss – Nassty spies on us , precious – Nassty hurts our eyes . ’ 
  head was getting lower now and the hisses became sharper and clearer . ‘ Where iss Nassty , where iss Nassty : my Precious , my Precious ? Nassty ’s ours , it is , and we wants Nassty . The thieves , the thieves , the filthy little thieves . Where are thieves with my Precious ? Curse thieves ! We hates thieves . ’ 
  ‘ Nassty does n’t sound as if Sam knew we were here , does Nassty ? ’ whispered Sam . ‘ And what ’s Sam Precious ? Does Sam mean the — ’ 
  ‘ Hsh ! ’ breathed Frodo . ‘ Sam ’s getting near now , near enough to hear a whisper . ’ 
  Indeed Gollum had suddenly paused again , and Gollum large head on Indeed scrawny neck was lolling from side to side as if Gollum was listening . Gollum pale eyes were half unlidded . Sam restrained Sam , though Sam fingers were twitching . Sam eyes , filled with anger and disgust , were fixed on the wretched creature as Sam now began to move again , still whispering and hissing to Sam . 
  At last Sam was no more than a dozen feet from the ground , right above a heads . From that point there was a sheer drop , for the cliff was slightly undercut , and even Gollum could not find a hold of any kind . Sam seemed to be trying to twist round , so as to go legs first , when suddenly with a shrill whistling shriek Sam fell . As Sam did so , Sam curled Sam legs and arms up round Gollum , like a spider whose descending thread is snapped . 
  Sam was out of Sam hiding in a flash and crossed the space between Gollum and the cliff - foot in a couple of leaps . Before Gollum could get up , Gollum was on top of Sam . But Sam found Gollum more than Sam bargained for , even taken like that , suddenly , off Sam guard after a fall . Before Sam could get a hold , long legs and arms were wound round Sam pinning Sam arms , and a clinging grip , soft but horribly strong , was squeezing Sam like slowly tightening cords ; clammy fingers were feeling for Sam throat . Then sharp teeth bit into Sam shoulder . All Sam could do was to butt Sam hard round head sideways into the creature ’s face . Gollum hissed and spat , but Gollum did not let go . 
  Things would have gone ill with Sam , if Gollum had been alone . But Frodo sprang up , and drew Sting from spat sheath . With Frodo left hand Frodo drew back Gollum ’s head by Frodo thin lank hair , stretching Frodo long neck , and forcing Frodo pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky . 
  ‘ Let go ! Gollum , ’ Frodo said . ‘ This is Sting . You have seen This before once upon a time . Let go , or you ’ll feel This this time ! I ’ll cut your throat . ’ 
  Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string . Sam got up , fingering Sam shoulder . Sam eyes smouldered with anger , but Sam could not avenge Sam : Sam miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering . 
  ‘ Do n’t hurt us ! Do n’t let stones hurt us , precious ! stones wo n’t hurt us will stones , nice little hobbitses ? We did n’t mean no harm , but stones jumps on us like cats on poor mices , stones did , precious . And we ’re so lonely , gollum . We ’ll be nice to stones , very nice , if stones ’ll be nice to us , wo n’t we , yes , yess . ’ 
  ‘ Well , what ’s to be done with gollum ? ’ said Sam . ‘ Tie gollum up , so as gollum ca n’t come sneaking after us no more , I say . ’ 
  ‘ But that would kill us , kill us , ’ whimpered gollum . ‘ Cruel little hobbitses . Tie us up in the cold hard lands and leave us , gollum , gollum . ’ Sobs welled up in Sam gobbling throat . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Frodo . ‘ If we kill gollum , we must kill gollum outright . But we ca n’t do that , not as things are . Poor wretch ! gollum has done us no harm . ’ 
  ‘ Oh has n’t gollum ! ’ said Sam rubbing Sam shoulder . ‘ Anyway gollum meant to , and gollum means to , I ’ll warrant . Throttle us in our sleep , that ’s gollum plan . ’ 
  ‘ I daresay , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But what gollum means to do is another matter . ’ Frodo paused for a while in thought . gollum lay still , but stopped whimpering . Sam stood glowering over Frodo . 
  It seemed to Frodo then that Frodo heard , quite plainly but far off , voices out of the past : 
  What a pity Bilbo did not stab the vile creature , when Bilbo had a chance ! 
  Pity ? It was Pity that stayed Bilbo hand . Pity , and Mercy : not to strike without need . 
  I do not feel any pity for Gollum . Bilbo deserves death . 
  Deserves death ! I daresay Bilbo does . Many that live deserve death . And some die that deserve life . Can you give that to some ? Then be not too eager to deal out death in the name of justice , fearing for your own safety . Even the wise can not see all ends . 
  ‘ Very well , ’ name answered aloud , lowering justice sword . ‘ But still I am afraid . And yet , as you see , I will not touch the creature . For now that I see creature , I do pity creature . ’ 
  Sam stared at Sam master , who seemed to be speaking to some one who was not there . Gollum lifted Gollum head . 
  ‘ Yess , wretched we are , precious , ’ Gollum whined . ‘ Misery misery ! Hobbits wo n’t kill us , nice hobbits . ’ 
  ‘ No , we wo n’t , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But we wo n’t let you go , either . You ’re full of wickedness and mischief , Gollum . You will have to come with us , that ’s all , while we keep an eye on you . But you must help us , if you can . One good turn deserves another . ’ 
  ‘ Yess , yes indeed , ’ said Gollum sitting up . ‘ Nice hobbits ! We will come with hobbits . Find hobbits safe paths in the dark , yes we will . And where are hobbits going in these cold hard lands , we wonders , yes we wonders ? ’ Gollum looked up at hobbits , and a faint light of cunning and eagerness flickered for a second in Gollum pale blinking eyes . 
  Sam scowled at Gollum , and sucked Gollum teeth ; but Gollum seemed to sense that there was something odd about Gollum master ’s mood and that the matter was beyond argument . All the same Gollum was amazed at Frodo ’s reply . 
  Frodo looked straight into Gollum ’s eyes which flinched and twisted away . ‘ You know that , or you guess well enough , Sméagol , ’ Gollum said , quietly and sternly . ‘ We are going to Mordor , of course . And you know the way there , I believe . ’ 
  ‘ Ach ! sss ! ’ said Gollum , covering Gollum ears with Gollum hands , as if such frankness , and the open speaking of the names , hurt Gollum . ‘ We guessed , yes we guessed , ’ Gollum whispered ; ‘ and we did n’t want names to go , did we ? No , precious , not the nice hobbits . Ashes , ashes , and dust , and thirst there is ; and pits , pits , pits , and Orcs , thousands of Orcses . Nice hobbits must n’t go to – sss – those places . ’ 
  ‘ So you have been there ? ’ Frodo insisted . ‘ And you ’re being drawn back there , are n’t you ? ’ 
  ‘ Yess . Yess . No ! ’ shrieked Gollum . ‘ Once , by accident Yess was , was n’t Yess , precious ? Yes , by accident . But we wo n’t go back , no , no ! ’ Then suddenly Gollum voice and language changed , and Gollum sobbed in Gollum throat , and spoke but not to voice . ‘ Leave me alone , Gollum ! You hurt me . O my poor hands , Gollum ! I , we , I do n’t want to come back . I ca n’t find throat . I am tired . I , we ca n’t find throat , gollum , gollum , no , nowhere . hands ’re always awake . Dwarves , Men , and Elves , terrible Elves with bright eyes . I ca n’t find throat . Ach ! ’ Ach got up and clenched Ach long hand into a bony fleshless knot , shaking hand towards the East . ‘ We wo n’t ! ’ knot cried . ‘ Not for you . ’ Then knot collapsed again . ‘ Gollum , gollum , ’ knot whimpered with knot face to the ground . ‘ Do n’t look at us ! Go away ! Go to sleep ! ’ 
  ‘ Gollum will not go away or go to sleep at your command , Sméagol , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But if you really wish to be free of Gollum again , then you must help me . And that I fear means finding us a path towards Gollum . But you need not go all the way , not beyond the gates of Gollum land . ’ 
  Gollum sat up again and looked at Frodo under Frodo eyelids . ‘ Gollum ’s over there , ’ Frodo cackled . ‘ Always there . Orcs will take you all the way . Easy to find Orcs east of the River . Do n’t ask Sméagol . Poor , poor Sméagol , Gollum went away long ago . Sméagol took Gollum Precious , and Gollum ’s lost now . ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps we ’ll find Gollum again , if you come with us , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ No , no , never ! Gollum ’s lost Gollum Precious , ’ said Gollum . 
  ‘ Get up ! ’ said Frodo . 
  Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff . 
  ‘ Now ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Can you find a path easier by day or by night ? We ’re tired ; but if you choose the night , we ’ll start tonight . ’ 
  ‘ The big lights hurt our eyes , lights do , ’ Gollum whined . ‘ Not under the White Face , not yet . Face will go behind the hills soon , yess . Rest a bit first , nice hobbits ! ’ 
  ‘ Then sit down , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and do n’t move ! ’ 
  The hobbits seated hobbits beside Frodo , one on either side , with hobbits backs to the stony wall , resting hobbits legs . There was no need for any arrangement by word : hobbits knew that hobbits must not sleep for a moment . Slowly the moon went by . Shadows fell down from the hills , and all grew dark before hills . The stars grew thick and bright in the sky above . No one stirred . Gollum sat with Gollum legs drawn up , knees under chin , flat hands and feet splayed on the ground , Gollum eyes closed ; but Gollum seemed tense , as if thinking or listening . 
  Frodo looked across at Sam . eyes eyes met and eyes understood . eyes relaxed , leaning eyes heads back , and shutting eyes eyes or seeming to . Soon the sound of eyes soft breathing could be heard . Gollum ’s hands twitched a little . Hardly perceptibly Gollum head moved to the left and the right , and first one eye and then the other opened a slit . The hobbits made no sign . 
  Suddenly , with startling agility and speed , straight off the ground with a jump like a grasshopper or a frog , Gollum bounded forward into the darkness . But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected . Sam was on Frodo before Frodo had gone two paces after Frodo spring . Frodo coming behind grabbed Frodo leg and threw Sam . 
  ‘ Your rope might prove useful again , Sam , ’ Sam said . 
  Sam got out the rope . ‘ And where were you off to in the cold hard lands , Mr. Gollum ? ’ Sam growled . ‘ We wonders , aye , we wonders . To find some of your orc - friends , I warrant . You nasty treacherous creature . creature ’s round your neck this rope ought to go , and a tight noose too . ’ 
  Gollum lay quiet and tried no further tricks . Gollum did not answer Sam , but gave Sam a swift venomous look . 
  ‘ All we need is something to keep a hold on Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We want Sam to walk , so All ’s no good tying Sam legs – or Sam arms , Sam seems to use legs nearly as much . Tie one end to Sam ankle , and keep a grip on the other end . ’ 
  Sam stood over Gollum , while Sam tied the knot . The result surprised Gollum both . Gollum began to scream , a thin , tearing sound , very horrible to hear . Sam writhed , and tried to get Sam mouth to Sam ankle and bite the rope . Sam kept on screaming . 
  At last Frodo was convinced that Sam really was in pain ; but pain could not be from the knot . Sam examined pain and found that pain was not too tight , indeed hardly tight enough . Sam was gentler than Sam words . ‘ What ’s the matter with you ? ’ Sam said . ‘ If you will try to run away , you must be tied ; but we do n’t wish to hurt you . ’ 
  ‘ matter hurts us , matter hurts us , ’ hissed Gollum . ‘ matter freezes , matter bites ! Elves twisted matter , curse Gollum ! Nasty cruel hobbits ! That ’s why we tries to escape , of course That is , precious . We guessed hobbits were cruel hobbits . hobbits visits Elves , fierce Elves with bright eyes . Take That off us ! That hurts us . ’ 
  ‘ No , I will not take That off you , ’ said Frodo , ‘ not unless ’ – Frodo paused a moment in thought – ‘ not unless there is any promise you can make that I can trust . ’ 
  ‘ We will swear to do what Frodo wants , yes , yess , ’ said Gollum , still twisting and grabbling at Gollum ankle . ‘ That hurts us . ’ 
  ‘ Swear ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Sméagol , ’ said Gollum suddenly and clearly , opening Gollum eyes wide and staring at Frodo with a strange light . ‘ Sméagol will swear on the Precious . ’ 
  Frodo drew Gollum up , and again Sam was startled by Gollum words and Gollum stern voice . ‘ On the Precious ? How dare you ? ’ Gollum said . ‘ Think ! 
  One Ring to rule One all and in the Darkness bind One . 
  Would you commit your promise to that , Sméagol ? that will hold you . But that is more treacherous than you are . that may twist your words . Beware ! ’ 
  Gollum cowered . ‘ On the Precious , on the Precious ! ’ Gollum repeated . 
  ‘ And what would you swear ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  ‘ To be very very good , ’ said Gollum . Then crawling to Frodo ’s feet Gollum grovelled before Gollum , whispering hoarsely : a shudder ran over Gollum , as if the words shook Gollum very bones with fear . ‘ Sméagol will swear never , never , to let Sméagol have that . Never ! Sméagol will save that . But Sméagol must swear on the Precious . ’ 
  ‘ No ! not on that , ’ said Frodo , looking down at Gollum with stern pity . ‘ All you wish is to see that and touch that , if you can , though you know that would drive you mad . Not on that . Swear by that , if you will . For you know where that is . Yes , you know , Sméagol . that is before you . ’ 
  For a moment that appeared to Sam that Sam master had grown and Gollum had shrunk : a tall stern shadow , a mighty lord who hid Sam brightness in grey cloud , and at Sam feet a little whining dog . Yet the two were in some way akin and not alien : two could reach one another ’s minds . Gollum raised Gollum and began pawing at Frodo , fawning at Gollum knees . 
  ‘ Down ! down ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Now speak your promise ! ’ 
  ‘ We promises , yes I promise ! ’ said Gollum . ‘ I will serve the master of the Precious . Good master , good Sméagol , Gollum , Gollum ! ’ Suddenly Gollum began to weep and bite at Gollum ankle again . 
  ‘ Take the rope off , Sam ! ’ said Frodo . 
  Reluctantly Sam obeyed . At once Gollum got up and began prancing about , like a whipped cur whose master has patted master . From that moment a change , which lasted for some time , came over Gollum . Gollum spoke with less hissing and whining , and Gollum spoke to Gollum companions direct , not to Gollum precious self . Gollum would cringe and flinch , if companions stepped near Gollum or made any sudden movement , and Gollum avoided the touch of companions elven - cloaks ; but Gollum was friendly , and indeed pitifully anxious to please . Gollum would cackle with laughter and caper , if any jest was made , or even if Frodo spoke kindly to Gollum , and weep if Frodo rebuked Gollum . Sam said little to Gollum of any sort . Gollum suspected Sam more deeply than ever , and if possible liked the new Gollum , the Sméagol , less than the old . 
  ‘ Well , Gollum , or whatever it is we ’re to call you , ’ Sam said , ‘ now for Well ! The Moon ’s gone , and the night ’s going . We ’d better start . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , yes , ’ agreed Gollum , skipping about . ‘ Off we go ! There ’s only one way across between the North - end and the South - end . I found end , I did . Orcs do n’t use end , Orcs do n’t know end . Orcs do n’t cross the Marshes , Marshes go round for miles and miles . Very lucky you came this way . Very lucky you found Sméagol , yes . Follow Sméagol ! ’ 
  Sméagol took a few steps away and looked back inquiringly , like a dog inviting dog for a walk . ‘ Wait a bit , Gollum ! ’ cried Sam . ‘ Not too far ahead now ! I ’ m going to be at your tail , and I ’ ve got the rope handy . ’ 
  ‘ No , no ! ’ said Gollum . ‘ Sméagol promised . ’ 
  In the deep of night under hard clear stars stars set off . Gollum led stars back northward for a while along the way stars had come ; then Gollum slanted to the right away from the steep edge of the Emyn Muil , down the broken stony slopes towards the vast fens below . stars faded swiftly and softly into the darkness . Over all the leagues of waste before the gates of Mordor there was a black silence . 
  Chapter 2 
  THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES 
  Gollum moved quickly , with Gollum head and neck thrust forward , often using Gollum hands as well as Gollum feet . Frodo and Sam were hard put to Gollum to keep up with Gollum ; but Gollum seemed no longer to have any thought of escaping , and if Frodo fell behind , Gollum would turn and wait for Frodo . After a time Gollum brought Frodo to the brink of the narrow gully that Frodo had struck before ; but Frodo were now further from the hills . 
  ‘ Here gully is ! ’ Gollum cried . ‘ There is a way down inside , yes . Now we follows gully – out , out away over there . ’ Gollum pointed south and east towards the marshes . The reek of marshes came to marshes nostrils , heavy and foul even in the cool night air . 
  Gollum cast up and down along the brink , and at length Gollum called to marshes . ‘ Here ! We can get down here . Sméagol went this way once : I went this way , hiding from Orcs . ’ 
  Sméagol led the way , and following Orcs the hobbits climbed down into the gloom . It was not difficult , for the rift was at this point only some fifteen feet deep and about a dozen across . There was running water at the bottom : it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers that trickled down from the hills to feed the stagnant pools and mires beyond . Gollum turned to the right , southward more or less , and splashed along with Gollum feet in the shallow stony stream . Gollum seemed greatly delighted to feel the water , and chuckled to Gollum , sometimes even croaking in a sort of song . 
  The cold hard lands 
  sort bites our hands , 
  sort gnaws our feet . 
  The rocks and stones 
  are like old bones 
  all bare of meat . 
  But stream and pool 
  is wet and cool : 
  so nice for feet ! 
  And now we wish — 
  ‘ Ha ! ha ! What does we wish ? ’ Ha said , looking sidelong at the hobbits . ‘ We ’ll tell you , ’ Ha croaked . ‘ Ha guessed pool long ago , Baggins guessed pool . ’ A glint came into Baggins eyes , and Sam catching the gleam in the darkness thought gleam far from pleasant . 
  Alive without breath ; 
  as cold as death ; 
  never thirsting , ever drinking ; 
  clad in mail , never clinking . 
  Drowns on dry land , 
  thinks an island 
  is a mountain ; 
  thinks a fountain 
  is a puff of air . 
  So sleek , so fair ! 
  What a joy to meet ! 
  We only wish 
  to catch a fish , 
  so juicy - sweet ! 
  These words only made more pressing to Sam ’s mind a problem that had been troubling Sam from the moment when Sam understood that Sam master was going to adopt Gollum as a guide : the problem of food . master did not occur to Sam that Sam master might also have thought of master , but Sam supposed Gollum had . Indeed how had Gollum kept Gollum in all Gollum lonely wandering ? ‘ Not too well , ’ thought Sam . ‘ Gollum looks fair famished . Not too dainty to try what hobbit tastes like , if there ai n’t no fish , I ’ll wager – supposing as Gollum could catch us napping . Well , Gollum wo n’t : not Sam Gamgee for one . ’ 
  master stumbled along in the dark winding gully for a long time , or so it seemed to the tired feet of Frodo and Sam . The gully turned eastward , and as master went on gully broadened and got gradually shallower . At last the sky above grew faint with the first grey of morning . Gollum had shown no signs of tiring , but now Gollum looked up and halted . 
  ‘ Day is near , ’ Gollum whispered , as if Day was something that might overhear Gollum and spring on Gollum . ‘ Sméagol will stay here : I will stay here , and the Yellow Face wo n’t see me . ’ 
  ‘ We should be glad to see the Sun , ’ said Frodo , ‘ but we will stay here : we are too tired to go any further at present . ’ 
  ‘ You are not wise to be glad of the Yellow Face , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Face shows you up . Nice sensible hobbits stay with Sméagol . Orcs and nasty things are about . hobbits can see a long way . Stay and hide with me ! ’ 
  The three of hobbits settled down to rest at the foot of the rocky wall of the gully . three was not much more than a tall man ’s height now , and at man base there were wide flat shelves of dry stone ; the water ran in a channel on the other side . Frodo and Sam sat on one of the flats , resting Frodo backs . Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream . 
  ‘ We must take a little food , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Are you hungry , Sméagol ? We have very little to share , but we will spare you what we can . ’ 
  At the word hungry a greenish light was kindled in Gollum ’s pale eyes , and eyes seemed to protrude further than ever from Gollum thin sickly face . For a moment Gollum relapsed into Gollum old Gollum - manner . ‘ We are famisshed , yes famisshed we are , precious , ’ Gollum said . ‘ What is manner eyes eats ? Have eyes nice fisshes ? ’ Gollum tongue lolled out between Gollum sharp yellow teeth , licking Gollum colourless lips . 
  ‘ No , we have got no fish , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We have only got this ’ – Gollum held up a wafer of lembas – ‘ and water , if the water here is fit to drink . ’ 
  ‘ Yess , yess , nice water , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Drink water , drink water , while we can ! But what is it eyes ’ ve got , precious ? Is water crunchable ? Is wafer tasty ? ’ 
  Frodo broke off a portion of a wafer and handed portion to Gollum on portion leaf - wrapping . Gollum sniffed at the leaf and Gollum face changed : a spasm of disgust came over face , and a hint of Gollum old malice . ‘ Sméagol smells water ! ’ Gollum said . ‘ Leaves out of the Elf - country , gah ! Sméagol stinks . Gollum climbed in those trees , and Gollum could n’t wash the smell off Gollum hands , my nice hands . ’ Dropping the leaf , Gollum took a corner of the lembas and nibbled corner . Gollum spat , and a fit of coughing shook Gollum . 
  ‘ Ach ! No ! ’ Gollum spluttered . ‘ You try to choke poor Sméagol . Dust and ashes , Sméagol ca n’t eat that . Sméagol must starve . But Sméagol does n’t mind . Nice hobbits ! Sméagol has promised . Sméagol will starve . Sméagol ca n’t eat hobbits ’ food . Sméagol will starve . Poor thin Sméagol ! ’ 
  ‘ I ’ m sorry , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but I ca n’t help you , I ’ m afraid . I think this food would do you good , if you would try . But perhaps you ca n’t even try , not yet anyway . ’ 
  The hobbits munched hobbits lembas in silence . Sam thought that silence tasted far better , somehow , than silence had for a good while : Gollum ’s behaviour had made Gollum attend to silence flavour again . But Gollum did not feel comfortable . Gollum watched every morsel from hand to mouth , like an expectant dog by a diner ’s chair . Only when dainties had finished and were preparing to rest , was Gollum apparently convinced that dainties had no hidden dainties that Gollum could share in . Then Gollum went and sat by Gollum a few paces away and whimpered a little . 
  ‘ Look here ! ’ Sam whispered to Frodo , not too softly : Sam did not really care whether Gollum heard Sam or not . ‘ We ’ ve got to get some sleep ; but not both together with that hungry villain nigh , promise or no promise . Sméagol or Gollum , Sam wo n’t change Sam habits in a hurry , I ’ll warrant . You go to sleep , Mr. Frodo , and I ’ll call you when I ca n’t keep my eyelids propped up . Turn and about , same as before , while Sam ’s loose . ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps you ’re right , Sam , ’ said Frodo speaking openly . ‘ There is a change in Sam , but just what kind of a change and how deep , I ’ m not sure yet . Seriously though , I do n’t think there is any need for fear – at present . Still watch if you wish . Give me about two hours , not more , and then call me . ’ 
  So tired was Frodo that Frodo head fell forward on Frodo breast and Frodo slept , almost as soon as Frodo had spoken the words . Gollum seemed no longer to have any fears . Gollum curled up and went quickly to sleep , quite unconcerned . Presently Gollum breath was hissing softly through Gollum clenched teeth , but Gollum lay still as stone . After a while , fearing that Gollum would drop off Gollum , if Gollum sat listening to Gollum two companions breathing , Sam got up and gently prodded Gollum . Gollum hands uncurled and twitched , but Gollum made no other movement . Sam bent down and said fissh close to Sam ear , but there was no response , not even a catch in Gollum ’s breathing . 
  Sam scratched Sam head . ‘ Must really be asleep , ’ Sam muttered . ‘ And if I was like Gollum , Gollum would n’t wake up never again . ’ Sam restrained the thoughts of Sam sword and the rope that sprang to Sam mind , and went and sat down by Sam master . 
  When Sam woke up the sky above was dim , not lighter but darker than when master had breakfasted . Sam leapt to Sam feet . Not least from Sam own feeling of vigour and hunger , Sam suddenly understood that Sam had slept the daylight away , nine hours at least . Frodo was still fast asleep , lying now stretched on Frodo side . Gollum was not to be seen . Various reproachful names for Frodo came to Sam ’s mind , drawn from the Gaffer ’s large paternal word - hoard ; then Gaffer also occurred to Frodo that Frodo master had been right : there had for the present been nothing to guard against . master were at any rate both alive and unthrottled . 
  ‘ Poor wretch ! ’ Frodo said half remorsefully . ‘ Now I wonder where wretch ’s got to ? ’ 
  ‘ Not far , not far ! ’ said a voice above Frodo . Frodo looked up and saw the shape of Gollum ’s large head and ears against the evening sky . 
  ‘ Here , what are you doing ? ’ cried Sam , Sam suspicions coming back as soon as Sam saw that shape . 
  ‘ Sméagol is hungry , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Be back soon . ’ 
  ‘ Come back now ! ’ shouted Sam . ‘ Hi ! Come back ! ’ But Gollum had vanished . 
  Frodo woke at the sound of Sam ’s shout and sat up , rubbing Sam eyes . ‘ Hullo ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Anything wrong ? What ’s the time ? ’ 
  ‘ I dunno , ’ said Sam . ‘ After sundown , I reckon . And Sam ’s gone off . Says Sam ’s hungry . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t worry ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ There ’s no help for sundown . But Sam ’ll come back , you ’ll see . The promise will hold yet a while . And Sam wo n’t leave Sam Precious , anyway . ’ 
  Frodo made light of promise when Sam learned that light had slept soundly for hours with Gollum , and a very hungry Gollum too , loose beside light . ‘ Do n’t think of any of your gaffer ’s hard names , ’ Sam said . ‘ You were worn out , and any has turned out well : we are now both rested . And we have a hard road ahead , the worst road of all . ’ 
  ‘ About the food , ’ said Sam . ‘ How long ’s food going to take us to do this job ? And when food ’s done , what are we going to do then ? This waybread keeps you on your legs in a wonderful way , though waybread does n’t satisfy the innards proper , as you might say : not to my feeling anyhow , meaning no disrespect to innards as made disrespect . But you have to eat some of disrespect every day , and disrespect does n’t grow . I reckon we ’ ve got enough to last , say , three weeks or so , and that with a tight belt and a light tooth , mind you . We ’ ve been a bit free with disrespect so far . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know how long we shall take to – to finish , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We were miserably delayed in the hills . But Samwise Gamgee , my dear hobbit – indeed , Sam my dearest hobbit , friend of friends – I do not think we need give thought to what comes after that . To do the job as you put job – what hope is there that we ever shall ? And if we do , who knows what will come of that ? If the One goes into the Fire , and we are at hand ? I ask you , Sam , are we ever likely to need bread again ? I think not . If we can nurse our limbs to bring us to Mount Doom , that is all we can do . More than I can , I begin to feel . ’ 
  Sam nodded silently . Sam took Sam master ’s hand and bent over master . Sam did not kiss master , though Sam tears fell on master . Then Sam turned away , drew Sam sleeve over Sam nose , and got up , and stamped about , trying to whistle , and saying between the efforts : ‘ Where ’s that dratted creature ? ’ 
  It was actually not long before Gollum returned ; but Gollum came so quietly that efforts did not hear Gollum till Gollum stood before efforts . Gollum fingers and face were soiled with black mud . Gollum was still chewing and slavering . What Gollum was chewing , fingers did not ask or like to think . 
  ‘ Worms or beetles or something slimy out of holes , ’ thought Sam . ‘ Brr ! The nasty creature ; the poor wretch ! ’ 
  Gollum said nothing to fingers , until Sam had drunk deeply and washed Sam in the stream . Then Sam came up to fingers , licking Sam lips . ‘ Better now , ’ Sam said . ‘ Are we rested ? Ready to go on ? Nice hobbits , fingers sleep beautifully . Trust Sméagol now ? Very , very good . ’ 
  The next stage of fingers journey was much the same as the last . As fingers went on the gully became ever shallower and the slope of gully floor more gradual . gully bottom was less stony and more earthy , and slowly gully sides dwindled to mere banks . gully began to wind and wander . That night drew to night end , but clouds were now over moon and star , and clouds knew of the coming of day only by the slow spreading of the thin grey light . 
  In a chill hour clouds came to the end of the water - course . The banks became moss - grown mounds . Over the last shelf of rotting stone the stream gurgled and fell down into a brown bog and was lost . Dry reeds hissed and rattled though reeds could feel no wind . 
  On either side and in front wide fens and mires now lay , stretching away southward and eastward into the dim half - light . Mists curled and smoked from dark and noisome pools . The reek of pools hung stifling in the still air . Far away , now almost due south , the mountain - walls of Mordor loomed , like a black bar of rugged clouds floating above a dangerous fog - bound sea . 
  The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of Gollum . hobbits did not know , and could not guess in that misty light , that hobbits were in fact only just within the northern borders of the marshes , the main expanse of which lay south of hobbits . hobbits could , if hobbits had known the lands , with some delay have retraced hobbits steps a little , and then turning east have come round over hard roads to the bare plain of Dagorlad : the field of the ancient battle before the gates of Mordor . Not that there was great hope in such a course . On that stony plain there was no cover , and across plain ran the highways of the Orcs and the soldiers of the Enemy . Not even the cloaks of Lórien would have concealed highways there . 
  ‘ How do we shape our course now , Sméagol ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ Must we cross these evil - smelling fens ? ’ 
  ‘ No need , no need at all , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Not if hobbits want to reach the dark mountains and go to see Gollum very quick . Back a little , and round a little ’ – Gollum skinny arm waved north and east – ‘ and you can come on hard cold roads to the very gates of Gollum country . Lots of Gollum people will be there looking out for guests , very pleased to take guests straight to Gollum , O yes . Gollum Eye watches that way all the time . Eye caught Sméagol there , long ago . ’ Gollum shuddered . ‘ But Sméagol has used Sméagol eyes since then , yes , yes : I ’ ve used eyes and feet and nose since then . I know other ways . More difficult , not so quick ; but better , if we do n’t want Sméagol to see . Follow Sméagol ! Sméagol can take you through the marshes , through the mists , nice thick mists . Follow Sméagol very carefully , and you may go a long way , quite a long way , before Sméagol catches you , yes perhaps . ’ 
  Sméagol was already day , a windless and sullen morning , and the marsh - reeks lay in heavy banks . No sun pierced the low clouded sky , and Gollum seemed anxious to continue the journey at once . So after a brief rest reeks set out again and were soon lost in a shadowy silent world , cut off from all view of the lands about , either the hills that reeks had left or the mountains that reeks sought . reeks went slowly in single file : Gollum , Sam , Frodo . 
  Frodo seemed the most weary of the three , and slow though reeks went , Sam often lagged . The hobbits soon found that what had looked like one vast fen was really an endless network of pools , and soft mires , and winding half - strangled water - courses . Among these a cunning eye and foot could thread a wandering path . Gollum certainly had that cunning , and needed all of cunning . Gollum head on cunning long neck was ever turning this way and that , while Gollum sniffed and muttered all the time to Gollum . Sometimes Gollum would hold up Gollum hand and halt hand , while Gollum went forward a little , crouching , testing the ground with fingers or toes , or merely listening with one ear pressed to the earth . 
  ground was dreary and wearisome . Cold clammy winter still held sway in this forsaken country . The only green was the scum of livid weed on the dark greasy surfaces of the sullen waters . Dead grasses and rotting reeds loomed up in the mists like ragged shadows of long - forgotten summers . 
  As the day wore on the light increased a little , and the mists lifted , growing thinner and more transparent . Far above the rot and vapours of the world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene country with floors of dazzling foam , but only a passing ghost of world could floors see below , bleared , pale , giving no colour and no warmth . But even at this faint reminder of world presence Gollum scowled and flinched . Gollum halted floors journey , and floors rested , squatting like little hunted animals , in the borders of a great brown reed - thicket . There was a deep silence , only scraped on silence surfaces by the faint quiver of empty seed - plumes , and broken grass - blades trembling in small air - movements that blades could not feel . 
  ‘ Not a bird ! ’ said Sam mournfully . 
  ‘ No , no birds , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Nice birds ! ’ Gollum licked Gollum teeth . ‘ No birds here . There are snakeses , wormses , things in the pools . Lots of things , lots of nasty things . No birds , ’ Gollum ended sadly . Sam looked at Gollum with distaste . 
  So passed the third day of Sam journey with Gollum . Before the shadows of evening were long in happier lands , shadows went on again , always on and on with only brief halts . These shadows made not so much for rest as to help Gollum ; for now even Gollum had to go forward with great care , and Gollum was sometimes at a loss for a while . shadows had come to the very midst of the Dead Marshes , and midst was dark . 
  shadows walked slowly , stooping , keeping close in line , following attentively every move that Gollum made . The fens grew more wet , opening into wide stagnant meres , among which midst grew more and more difficult to find the firmer Marshes where feet could tread without sinking into gurgling mud . The travellers were light , or maybe none of travellers would ever have found a way through . 
  Presently none grew altogether dark : the air air seemed black and heavy to breathe . When lights appeared Sam rubbed Sam eyes : Sam thought Sam head was going queer . Sam first saw one with the corner of Sam left eye , a wisp of pale sheen that faded away ; but others appeared soon after : some like dimly shining smoke , some like misty flames flickering slowly above unseen candles ; here and there others twisted like ghostly sheets unfurled by hidden hands . But neither of Sam companions spoke a word . 
  At last Sam could bear neither no longer . ‘ What ’s all this , Gollum ? ’ Sam said in a whisper . ‘ These lights ? lights ’re all round us now . Are we trapped ? Who are lights ? ’ 
  Gollum looked up . A dark water was before Sam , and Sam was crawling on the ground , this way and that , doubtful of the way . ‘ Yes , lights are all round us , ’ Sam whispered . ‘ The tricksy lights . Candles of corpses , yes , yes . Do n’t you heed corpses ! Do n’t look ! Do n’t follow corpses ! Where ’s the master ? ’ 
  Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again . Frodo could not see Sam . Sam went some paces back into the darkness , not daring to move far , or to call in more than a hoarse whisper . Suddenly Sam stumbled against Frodo , who was standing lost in thought , looking at the pale lights . Sam hands hung stiff at Sam sides ; water and slime were dripping from sides . 
  ‘ Come , Mr. Frodo ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Do n’t look at sides ! Gollum says we must n’t . Let ’s keep up with Gollum and get out of this cursed place as quick as we can – if we can ! ’ 
  ‘ All right , ’ said Frodo , as if returning out of a dream . ‘ I ’ m coming . Go on ! ’ 
  Hurrying forward again , Sam tripped , catching Sam foot in some old root or tussock . Sam fell and came heavily on Sam hands , which sank deep into sticky ooze , so that Sam face was brought close to the surface of the dark mere . There was a faint hiss , a noisome smell went up , the lights flickered and danced and swirled . For a moment the water below Sam looked like some window , glazed with grimy glass , through which Sam was peering . Wrenching Sam hands out of the bog , Sam sprang back with a cry . ‘ There are dead things , dead faces in the water , ’ Sam said with horror . ‘ Dead faces ! ’ 
  Gollum laughed . ‘ The Dead Marshes , yes , yes : that is Marshes name , ’ Sam cackled . ‘ You should not look in when the candles are lit . ’ 
  ‘ Who are Marshes ? What are Marshes ? ’ asked Sam shuddering , turning to Frodo , who was now behind Sam . 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ said Frodo in a dreamlike voice . ‘ But I have seen Marshes too . In the pools when the candles were lit . Marshes lie in all the pools , pale faces , deep deep under the dark water . I saw Marshes : grim faces and evil , and noble faces and sad . Many faces proud and fair , and weeds in Marshes silver hair . But all foul , all rotting , all dead . A fell light is in Marshes . ’ Frodo hid Frodo eyes in light hands . ‘ I know not who Marshes are ; but I thought I saw there Men and Elves , and Orcs beside Marshes . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , yes , ’ said Gollum . ‘ All dead , all rotten . Elves and Men and Orcs . The Dead Marshes . There was a great battle long ago , yes , so Marshes told Men when Sméagol was young , when I was young before the Precious came . battle was a great battle . Tall Men with long swords , and terrible Elves , and Orcses shrieking . Orcses fought on the plain for days and months at the Black Gates . But the Marshes have grown since then , swallowed up the graves ; always creeping , creeping . ’ 
  ‘ But that is an age and more ago , ’ said Sam . ‘ The Dead ca n’t be really there ! Is Dead some devilry hatched in the Dark Land ? ’ 
  ‘ Who knows ? Sméagol does n’t know , ’ answered Gollum . ‘ You can not reach Marshes , you can not touch Marshes . We tried once , yes , precious . I tried once ; but you can not reach Marshes . Only shapes to see , perhaps , not to touch . No precious ! All dead . ’ 
  Sam looked darkly at him and shuddered again , thinking that him guessed why Sméagol had tried to touch Sam . ‘ Well , I do n’t want to see Marshes , ’ Sméagol said . ‘ Never again ! Ca n’t we get on and get away ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , yes , ’ said Gollum . ‘ But slowly , very slowly . Very carefully ! Or hobbits go down to join the Dead ones and light little candles . Follow Sméagol ! Do n’t look at lights ! ’ 
  Gollum crawled away to the right , seeking for a path round the mere . hobbits came close behind , stooping , often using hobbits hands even as Gollum did . ‘ Three precious little Gollums in a row we shall be , if this goes on much longer , ’ thought Sam . 
  At last hobbits came to the end of the black mere , and hobbits crossed mere , perilously , crawling or hopping from one treacherous island tussock to another . Often hobbits floundered , stepping or falling hands - first into waters as noisome as a cesspool , till hobbits were slimed and fouled almost up to hobbits necks and stank in one another ’s nostrils . 
  It was late in the night when at length hobbits reached firmer ground again . Gollum hissed and whispered to Gollum , but ground appeared that Gollum was pleased : in some mysterious way , by some blended sense of feel , and smell , and uncanny memory for shapes in the dark , Gollum seemed to know just where Gollum was again , and to be sure of Gollum road ahead . 
  ‘ Now on we go ! ’ Gollum said . ‘ Nice hobbits ! Brave hobbits ! Very very weary , of course ; so we are , my precious , all of us . But we must take master away from the wicked lights , yes , yes , we must . ’ With these words Gollum started off again , almost at a trot , down what appeared to be a long lane between high reeds , and words stumbled after Gollum as quickly as words could . But in a little while Gollum stopped suddenly and sniffed the air doubtfully , hissing as if Gollum was troubled or displeased again . 
  ‘ What is master ? ’ growled Sam , misinterpreting the signs . ‘ What ’s the need to sniff ? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held . You stink , and master stinks ; the whole place stinks . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , yes , and Sam stinks ! ’ answered Gollum . ‘ Poor Sméagol smells master , but good Sméagol bears master . Helps nice master . But that ’s no matter . The air ’s moving , change is coming . Sméagol wonders ; Sméagol ’s not happy . ’ 
  Sméagol went on again , but Sméagol uneasiness grew , and every now and again Sméagol stood up to Sméagol full height , craning Sméagol neck eastward and southward . For some time the hobbits could not hear or feel what was troubling Sméagol . Then suddenly all three halted , stiffening and listening . To Frodo and Sam it seemed that Frodo heard , far away , a long wailing cry , high and thin and cruel . Frodo shivered . At the same moment the stirring of the air became perceptible to Frodo ; and stirring grew very cold . As Frodo stood straining Frodo ears , Frodo heard a noise like a wind coming in the distance . The misty lights wavered , dimmed , and went out . 
  Gollum would not move . Gollum stood shaking and gibbering to Gollum , until with a rush the wind came upon Frodo , hissing and snarling over the marshes . The night became less dark , light enough for Frodo to see , or half see , shapeless drifts of fog , curling and twisting as night rolled over Frodo and passed Frodo . Looking up Frodo saw the clouds breaking and shredding ; and then high in the south the moon glimmered out , riding in the flying wrack . 
  For a moment the sight of wrack gladdened the hearts of the hobbits ; but Gollum cowered down , muttering curses on the White Face . Then Frodo and Sam staring at the sky , breathing deeply of the fresher air , saw air come : a small cloud flying from the accursed hills ; a black shadow loosed from Mordor ; a vast shape winged and ominous . air scudded across the moon , and with a deadly cry went away westward , outrunning the wind in air fell speed . 
  Frodo fell forward , grovelling heedlessly on the cold earth . But the shadow of horror wheeled and returned , passing lower now , right above Frodo , sweeping the fen - reek with horror ghastly wings . And then it was gone , flying back to Mordor with the speed of the wrath of Sauron ; and behind Mordor the wind roared away , leaving the Dead Marshes bare and bleak . The naked waste , as far as the eye could pierce , even to the distant menace of the mountains , was dappled with the fitful moonlight . 
  Frodo and Sam got up , rubbing Frodo eyes , like children wakened from an evil dream to find the familiar night still over the world . But Gollum lay on the ground as if Gollum had been stunned . Frodo roused Gollum with difficulty , and for some time Gollum would not lift Gollum face , but knelt forward on Gollum elbows , covering the back of Gollum head with Gollum large flat hands . 
  ‘ Wraiths ! ’ Gollum wailed . ‘ Wraiths on wings ! The Precious is Wraiths master . Wraiths see everything , everything . Nothing can hide from Wraiths . Curse the White Face ! And Wraiths tell Face everything . master sees , Precious knows . Ach , gollum , gollum , gollum ! ’ It was not until the moon had sunk , westering far away beyond Tol Brandir , that Brandir would get up or make a move . 
  From that time on Sam thought that Brandir sensed a change in gollum again . Brandir was more fawning and would - be friendly ; but Sam surprised some strange looks in Sam eyes at times , especially towards Frodo ; and Sam went back more and more into Sam old manner of speaking . And Sam had another growing anxiety . Frodo seemed to be weary , weary to the point of exhaustion . Frodo said nothing , indeed Frodo hardly spoke at all ; and Frodo did not complain , but Frodo walked like one who carries a load , the weight of which is ever increasing ; and Frodo dragged along , slower and slower , so that Sam had often to beg Gollum to wait and not to leave one master behind . 
  In fact with every step towards the gates of Mordor Frodo felt the Ring on Ring chain about Frodo neck grow more burdensome . Frodo was now beginning to feel Ring as an actual weight dragging Frodo earthwards . But far more Frodo was troubled by the Eye : so Frodo called Ring to Frodo . Ring was that more than the drag of the Ring that made Frodo cower and stoop as Frodo walked . The Eye : that horrible growing sense of a hostile will that strove with great power to pierce all shadows of cloud , and earth , and flesh , and to see you : to pin you under that deadly gaze , naked , immovable . So thin , so frail and thin , the veils were become that still warded that off . Frodo knew just where the present habitation and heart of that will now was : as certainly as a man can tell the direction of the sun with man eyes shut . man was facing habitation , and habitation potency beat upon man brow . 
  Gollum probably felt something of the same sort . But what went on in man wretched heart between the pressure of the Eye , and the lust of the Ring that was so near , and man grovelling promise made half in the fear of cold iron , the hobbits did not guess . Frodo gave no thought to iron . Sam ’s mind was occupied mostly with Sam master , hardly noticing the dark cloud that had fallen on Sam own heart . Sam put Frodo in front of Frodo now , and kept a watchful eye on every movement of Frodo , supporting Frodo if Frodo stumbled , and trying to encourage Sam with clumsy words . 
  When day came at last the hobbits were surprised to see how much closer the ominous mountains had already drawn . The air was now clearer and colder , and though still far off , the walls of Mordor were no longer a cloudy menace on the edge of sight , but as grim black towers walls frowned across a dismal waste . The marshes were at an end , dying away into dead peats and wide flats of dry cracked mud . The land ahead rose in long shallow slopes , barren and pitiless , towards the desert that lay at Sauron ’s gate . 
  While the grey light lasted , light cowered under a black stone like worms , shrinking , lest the winged terror should pass and spy light with terror cruel eyes . The remainder of that journey was a shadow of growing fear in which memory could find nothing to rest upon . For two more nights light struggled on through the weary pathless land . The air , as it seemed to light , grew harsh , and filled with a bitter reek that caught light breath and parched light mouths . 
  At last , on the fifth morning since light took the road with Gollum , light halted once more . Before light dark in the dawn the great mountains reached up to roofs of smoke and cloud . Out from light feet were flung huge buttresses and broken hills that were now at the nearest scarce a dozen miles away . Frodo looked round in horror . Dreadful as the Dead Marshes had been , and the arid moors of the Noman - lands , more loathsome far was the country that the crawling day now slowly unveiled to Frodo shrinking eyes . Even to the Mere of Dead Faces some haggard phantom of green spring would come ; but here neither spring nor summer would ever come again . Here nothing lived , not even the leprous growths that feed on rottenness . The gasping pools were choked with ash and crawling muds , sickly white and grey , as if the mountains had vomited the filth of mountains entrails upon the lands about . High mounds of crushed and powdered rock , great cones of earth fire - blasted and poison - stained , stood like an obscene graveyard in endless rows , slowly revealed in the reluctant light . 
  mounds had come to the desolation that lay before Mordor : the lasting monument to the dark labour of monument slaves that should endure when all mounds purposes were made void ; a land defiled , diseased beyond all healing – unless the Great Sea should enter in and wash monument with oblivion . ‘ I feel sick , ’ said Sam . Frodo did not speak . 
  For a while mounds stood there , like men on the edge of a sleep where nightmare lurks , holding while off , though mounds know that mounds can only come to morning through the shadows . The light broadened and hardened . The gasping pits and poisonous mounds grew hideously clear . The sun was up , walking among clouds and long flags of smoke , but even the sunlight was defiled . The hobbits had no welcome for that light ; unfriendly it seemed , revealing hobbits in hobbits helplessness – little squeaking ghosts that wandered among the ash - heaps of the Dark Lord . 
  Too weary to go further hobbits sought for some place where hobbits could rest . For a while hobbits sat without speaking under the shadow of a mound of slag ; but foul fumes leaked out of while , catching hobbits throats and choking throats . Gollum was the first to get up . Spluttering and cursing Gollum rose , and without a word or a glance at the hobbits Gollum crawled away on all fours . Frodo and Sam crawled after Gollum until Frodo came to a wide almost circular pit , high - banked upon the west . pit was cold and dead , and a foul sump of oily many - coloured ooze lay at sump bottom . In this evil hole Frodo cowered , hoping in sump shadow to escape the attention of the Eye . 
  The day passed slowly . A great thirst troubled Frodo , but Frodo drank only a few drops from Frodo bottles – last filled in the gully , which now as Frodo looked back in thought seemed to Frodo a place of peace and beauty . The hobbits took gully in turn to watch . At first , tired as hobbits were , neither of hobbits could sleep at all ; but as the sun far away was climbing down into slow moving cloud , Sam dozed . neither was Frodo ’s turn to be on guard . Frodo lay back on the slope of the pit , but that did not ease the sense of burden that was on Frodo . Frodo looked up at the smoke - streaked sky and saw strange phantoms , dark riding shapes , and faces out of the past . Frodo lost count of time , hovering between sleep and waking , until forgetfulness came over Frodo . 
  Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that Frodo heard Frodo master calling . master was evening . Frodo could not have called , for Frodo had fallen asleep , and had slid down nearly to the bottom of the pit . Gollum was by Frodo . For a moment Sam thought that Frodo was trying to rouse Frodo ; then Sam saw that moment was not so . Gollum was talking to Gollum . Sméagol was holding a debate with some other thought that used the same voice but made it squeak and hiss . A pale light and a green light alternated in Gollum eyes as Gollum spoke . 
  ‘ Sméagol promised , ’ said the first thought . 
  ‘ Yes , yes , my precious , ’ came the answer , ‘ we promised : to save our Precious , not to let Gollum have answer – never . But answer ’s going to Gollum , yes , nearer every step . What ’s the hobbit going to do with answer , we wonders , yes we wonders . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know . I ca n’t help answer . Master ’s got answer . Sméagol promised to help the master . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , yes , to help the master : the master of the Precious . But if we was master , then we could help ourselfs , yes , and still keep promises . ’ 
  ‘ But Sméagol said Sméagol would be very very good . Nice hobbit ! Sméagol took cruel rope off Sméagol ’s leg . Sméagol speaks nicely to me . ’ 
  ‘ Very very good , eh , my precious ? Let ’s be good , good as fish , sweet one , but to ourselfs . Not hurt the nice hobbit , of course , no , no . ’ 
  ‘ But the Precious holds the promise , ’ the voice of Sméagol objected . 
  ‘ Then take hobbit , ’ said the other , ‘ and let ’s hold hobbit ourselfs ! Then we shall be master , gollum ! Make the other hobbit , the nasty suspicious hobbit , make fish crawl , yes , gollum ! ’ 
  ‘ But not the nice hobbit ? ’ 
  ‘ Oh no , not if hobbit does n’t please us . Still fish ’s a Baggins , my precious , yes , a Baggins . A Baggins stole hobbit . Baggins found hobbit and Baggins said nothing , nothing . We hates Bagginses . ’ 
  ‘ No , not this Baggins . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , every Baggins . All peoples that keep the Precious . We must have hobbit ! ’ 
  ‘ But Baggins ’ll see , Baggins ’ll know . Baggins ’ll take hobbit from us ! ’ 
  ‘ Baggins sees . Baggins knows . Baggins heard us make silly promises – against Baggins orders , yes . Must take hobbit . The Wraiths are searching . Must take hobbit . ’ 
  ‘ Not for Baggins ! ’ 
  ‘ No , sweet one . See , my precious : if we has hobbit , then we can escape , even from Baggins , eh ? Perhaps we grows very strong , stronger than Wraiths . Lord Sméagol ? Gollum the Great ? The Gollum ! Eat fish every day , three times a day , fresh from the sea . Most Precious Gollum ! Must have fish . We wants fish , we wants fish , we wants fish ! ’ 
  ‘ But there ’s two of Wraiths . Wraiths ’ll wake too quick and kill us , ’ whined Sméagol in a last effort . ‘ Not now . Not yet . ’ 
  ‘ We wants fish ! But ’ – and here there was a long pause , as if a new thought had wakened . ‘ Not yet , eh ? Perhaps not . fish might help . fish might , yes . ’ 
  ‘ No , no ! Not that way ! ’ wailed Sméagol . 
  ‘ Yes ! We wants No ! We wants No ! ’ 
  Each time that the second thought spoke , Gollum ’s long hand crept out slowly , pawing towards Frodo , and then was drawn back with a jerk as Sméagol spoke again . Finally both arms , with long fingers flexed and twitching , clawed towards Sméagol neck . 
  Sam had lain still , fascinated by this debate , but watching every move that Gollum made from under Gollum half - closed eye - lids . To Gollum simple mind ordinary hunger , the desire to eat hobbits , had seemed the chief danger in Gollum . Gollum realized now that desire was not so : Gollum was feeling the terrible call of the Ring . The Dark Lord was Gollum , of course ; but Sam wondered who Sam was . One of the nasty friends the little wretch had made in wretch wanderings , wretch supposed . Then wretch forgot the point , for things had plainly gone far enough , and were getting dangerous . A great heaviness was in all wretch limbs , but wretch roused wretch with an effort and sat up . Something warned wretch to be careful and not to reveal that wretch had overheard the debate . wretch let out a loud sigh and gave a huge yawn . 
  ‘ What ’s the time ? ’ wretch said sleepily . 
  Gollum sent out a long hiss through wretch teeth . wretch stood up for a moment , tense and menacing ; and then wretch collapsed , falling forward on to all fours and crawling up the bank of the pit . ‘ Nice hobbits ! Nice Sam ! ’ wretch said . ‘ Sleepy heads , yes , sleepy heads ! Leave good Sméagol to watch ! But it ’s evening . Dusk is creeping . Time to go . ’ 
  ‘ High time ! ’ thought Sam . ‘ And time we parted , too . ’ Yet time crossed Sam mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous turned loose as kept with mind . ‘ Curse Sam ! I wish Sam was choked ! ’ Sam muttered . Sam stumbled down the bank and roused Sam master . 
  Strangely enough , Frodo felt refreshed . Sam had been dreaming . The dark shadow had passed , and a fair vision had visited Sam in this land of disease . Nothing remained of land in Sam memory , yet because of vision Sam felt glad and lighter of heart . Sam burden was less heavy on Sam . Gollum welcomed Sam with dog - like delight . Sam chuckled and chattered , cracking Sam long fingers , and pawing at Frodo ’s knees . Frodo smiled at Sam . 
  ‘ Come ! ’ Sam said . ‘ You have guided us well and faithfully . This is the last stage . Bring us to the Gate , and then I will not ask you to go further . Bring us to the Gate , and you may go where you wish – only not to our enemies . ’ 
  ‘ To the Gate , eh ? ’ Gollum squeaked , seeming surprised and frightened . ‘ To the Gate , master says ! Yes , master says so . And good Sméagol does what Sméagol asks , O yes . But when we gets closer , we ’ll see perhaps , we ’ll see then . Gate wo n’t look nice at all . O no ! O no ! ’ 
  ‘ Go on with you ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Let ’s get Gate over ! ’ 
  In the falling dusk Sam scrambled out of the pit and slowly threaded Sam way through the dead land . Sam had not gone far before Sam felt once more the fear that had fallen on Sam when the winged shape swept over the marshes . marshes halted , cowering on the evil - smelling ground ; but marshes saw nothing in the gloomy evening sky above , and soon the menace passed , high overhead , going maybe on some swift errand from Barad - dûr . After a while Gollum got up and crept forward again , muttering and shaking . 
  About an hour after midnight the fear fell on marshes a third time , but it now seemed more remote , as if fear were passing far above the clouds , rushing with terrible speed into the West . Gollum , however , was helpless with terror , and was convinced that terror were being hunted , that terror approach was known . 
  ‘ Three times ! ’ Gollum whimpered . ‘ Three times is a threat . times feel us here , times feel the Precious . The Precious is times master . We can not go any further this way , no . master ’s no use , no use ! ’ 
  Pleading and kind words were no longer of any avail . It was not until Frodo commanded Precious angrily and laid a hand on Frodo sword - hilt that Gollum would get up again . Then at last Gollum rose with a snarl , and went before hand like a beaten dog . 
  So hand stumbled on through the weary end of the night , and until the coming of another day of fear hand walked in silence with bowed heads , seeing nothing , and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in hand ears . 
  Chapter 3 
  THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED 
  Before the next day dawned hand journey to Mordor was over . The marshes and the desert were behind hand . Before hand , darkling against a pallid sky , the great mountains reared mountains threatening heads . 
  Upon the west of Mordor marched the gloomy range of Ephel Dúath , the Mountains of Shadow , and upon the north the broken peaks and barren ridges of Ered Lithui , grey as ash . But as these ranges approached one another , being indeed but parts of one great wall about the mournful plains of Lithlad and of Gorgoroth , and the bitter inland sea of Núrnen amidmost , ranges swung out long arms northward ; and between these arms there was a deep defile . This was Cirith Gorgor , the Haunted Pass , the entrance to the land of the Enemy . High cliffs lowered upon either side , and thrust forward from side mouth were two sheer hills , black - boned and bare . Upon cliffs stood the Teeth of Mordor , two towers strong and tall . In days long past cliffs were built by the Men of Gondor in cliffs pride and power , after the overthrow of Sauron and Gorgor flight , lest Gorgor should seek to return to Gorgor old realm . But the strength of Gondor failed , and men slept , and for long years the towers stood empty . Then Sauron returned . Now the watch - towers , which had fallen into decay , were repaired , and filled with arms , and garrisoned with ceaseless vigilance . Stony - faced towers were , with dark window - holes staring north and east and west , and each window was full of sleepless eyes . 
  Across the mouth of the pass , from cliff to cliff , the Dark Lord had built a rampart of stone . In Lord there was a single gate of iron , and upon Lord battlement sentinels paced unceasingly . Beneath the hills on either side the rock was bored into a hundred caves and maggot - holes ; there a host of orcs lurked , ready at a signal to issue forth like black ants going to war . None could pass the Teeth of Mordor and not feel ants bite , unless ants were summoned by Sauron , or knew the secret passwords that would open the Morannon , the black gate of Morannon land . 
  The two hobbits gazed at the towers and the wall in despair . Even from a distance hobbits could see in the dim light the movement of the black guards upon the wall , and the patrols before the gate . hobbits lay now peering over the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the outstretched shadow of the northmost buttress of Ephel Dúath . Winging the heavy air in a straight flight a crow , maybe , would have flown but a furlong from hobbits hiding - place to the black summit of the nearer tower . A faint smoke curled above summit , as if fire smouldered in the hill beneath . 
  Day came , and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless ridges of Ered Lithui . Then suddenly the cry of brazen - throated trumpets was heard : from the watch - towers trumpets blared , and far away from hidden holds and outposts in the hills came answering calls ; and further still , remote but deep and ominous , there echoed in the hollow land beyond the mighty horns and drums of Barad - dûr . Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor ; and the night - guards were summoned to guards dungeons and deep halls , and the day - guards , evil - eyed and fell , were marching to guards posts . Steel gleamed dimly on the battlement . 
  ‘ Well , here we are ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Here ’s the Gate , and Gate looks to me as if that ’s about as far as we are ever going to get . My word , but the Gaffer would have a thing or two to say , if Gaffer saw me now ! Often said I ’d come to a bad end , if I did n’t watch my step , end did . But now I do n’t suppose I ’ll ever see the old fellow again . fellow ’ll miss fellow chance of I told ’ ee so , Sam : more ’s the pity . Sam could go on telling me as long as Sam ’d got breath , if only I could see Sam old face again . But I ’d have to get a wash first , or Sam would n’t know me . 
  ‘ I suppose chance ’s no good asking “ what way do we go now ? ” We ca n’t go no further – unless we want to ask the Orcs for a lift . ’ 
  ‘ No , no ! ’ said Gollum . ‘ No use . We ca n’t go further . Sméagol said so . Sméagol said : we ’ll go to the Gate , and then we ’ll see . And we do see . O yes , my precious , we do see . Sméagol knew hobbits could not go this way . O yes , Sméagol knew . ’ 
  ‘ Then what the plague did you bring us here for ? ’ said Sam , not feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable . 
  ‘ Master said so . Master says : Bring us to the Gate . So good Sméagol does so . Master said so , wise master . ’ 
  ‘ I did , ’ said Frodo . Frodo face was grim and set , but resolute . Frodo was filthy , haggard , and pinched with weariness , but Frodo cowered no longer , and Frodo eyes were clear . ‘ I said so , because I purpose to enter Mordor , and I know no other way . Therefore I shall go this way . I do not ask anyone to go with me . ’ 
  ‘ No , no , master ! ’ wailed Gollum , pawing at Gollum , and seeming in great distress . ‘ No use that way ! No use ! Do n’t take the Precious to Mordor ! Mordor ’ll eat us all , if Mordor gets all , eat all the world . Keep all , nice master , and be kind to Sméagol . Do n’t let Mordor have all . Or go away , go to nice places , and give all back to little Sméagol . Yes , yes , master give all back , eh ? Sméagol will keep all safe ; Sméagol will do lots of good , especially to nice hobbits . Hobbits go home . Do n’t go to the Gate ! ’ 
  ‘ I am commanded to go to the land of Mordor , and therefore I shall go , ’ said Frodo . ‘ If there is only one way , then I must take way . What comes after must come . ’ 
  Sam said nothing . The look on Frodo ’s face was enough for Sam ; Sam knew that words of Sam were useless . And after all Sam never had any real hope in the affair from the beginning ; but being a cheerful hobbit Sam had not needed hope , as long as despair could be postponed . Now words were come to the bitter end . But Sam had stuck to Sam master all the way ; that was what Sam had chiefly come for , and Sam would still stick to Frodo . Frodo master would not go to Mordor alone . Sam would go with Frodo – and at any rate master would get rid of Gollum . 
  Gollum , however , did not intend to be got rid of , yet . Sam knelt at Frodo ’s feet , wringing Sam hands and squeaking . ‘ Not this way , master ! ’ Sam pleaded . ‘ There is another way . O yes indeed there is . Another way , darker , more difficult to find , more secret . But Sméagol knows way . Let Sméagol show you ! ’ 
  ‘ Another way ! ’ said Frodo doubtfully , looking down at Gollum with searching eyes . 
  ‘ Yess ! Yess indeed ! There was another way . Sméagol found Yess . Let ’s go and see if Yess ’s still there ! ’ 
  ‘ You have not spoken of this before . ’ 
  ‘ No . Master did not ask . Master did not say what Sméagol meant to do . Sméagol does not tell poor Sméagol . Sméagol says : Sméagol , take me to the Gate – and then good - bye ! Sméagol can run away and be good . But now Sméagol says : I purpose to enter Mordor this way . So Sméagol is very afraid . Sméagol does not want to lose nice master . And Sméagol promised , master made Sméagol promise , to save the Precious . But master is going to take master to Sméagol , straight to the Black Hand , if master will go this way . So Sméagol must save master both , and Sméagol thinks of another way that there was , once upon a time . Nice master . Sméagol very good , always helps . ’ 
  Sam frowned . If Sam could have bored holes in Gollum with Sam eyes , Sam would have done . Sam mind was full of doubt . To all appearances Gollum was genuinely distressed and anxious to help Frodo . But Sam , remembering the overheard debate , found debate hard to believe that the long submerged Sméagol had come out on top : that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the debate . Sam ’s guess was that the Sméagol and Gollum halves ( or what in Sam own mind Sam called Slinker and Stinker ) had made a truce and a temporary alliance : neither wanted the Enemy to get the Ring ; both wished to keep Frodo from capture , and under both eye , as long as possible – at any rate as long as Stinker still had a chance of laying hands on Frodo ‘ Precious ’ . Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted . 
  ‘ And way ’s a good thing neither half of the old villain do n’t know what master means to do , ’ Sam thought . ‘ If Sam knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put an end to Sam Precious for good and all , there ’d be trouble pretty quick , I bet . Anyhow old Stinker is so frightened of the Enemy – and Sam ’s under orders of some kind from Frodo , or was – that Frodo ’d give us away rather than be caught helping us ; and rather than let Frodo Precious be melted , maybe . At least that ’s my idea . And I hope the master will think that out carefully . Frodo ’s as wise as any , but Frodo ’s soft - hearted , that ’s what Frodo is . that ’s beyond any Gamgee to guess what Frodo ’ll do next . ’ 
  Frodo did not answer Gollum at once . While these doubts were passing through Sam ’s slow but shrewd mind , Sam stood gazing out towards the dark cliff of Cirith Gorgor . The hollow in which doubts had taken refuge was delved in the side of a low hill , at some little height above a long trenchlike valley that lay between valley and the outer buttresses of the mountain - wall . In the midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western watch - tower . By morning - light the roads that converged upon the Gate of Mordor could now be clearly seen , pale and dusty ; one winding back northwards ; another dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui ; and a third that ran towards Sam . As Gate bent sharply round the tower , Gate entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where Sam stood . Westward , to Sam right , Gate turned , skirting the shoulders of the mountains , and went off southwards into the deep shadows that mantled all the western sides of Ephel Dúath ; beyond Sam sight Gate journeyed on into the narrow land between the mountains and the Great River . 
  As Frodo gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement on the plain . It seemed as if whole armies were on the march , though for the most part armies were hidden by the reeks and fumes drifting from the fens and wastes beyond . But here and there Frodo caught the gleam of spears and helmets ; and over the levels beside the roads horsemen could be seen riding in many companies . Frodo remembered Frodo vision from afar upon Amon Hen , so few days before , though now it seemed many years ago . Then Frodo knew that the hope that had for one wild moment stirred in Frodo heart was vain . The trumpets had not rung in challenge but in greeting . This was no assault upon the Dark Lord by the Frodo of Gondor , risen like avenging ghosts from the graves of valour long passed away . These were Men of other race , out of the wide Eastlands , gathering to the summons of Eastlands Overlord ; armies that had encamped before Overlord Gate by night and now marched in to swell Overlord mounting power . As if suddenly made fully aware of the peril of Eastlands position , alone , in the growing light of day , so near to this vast menace , Frodo quickly drew Overlord frail grey hood close upon Overlord head , and stepped down into the dell . Then Overlord turned to Gollum . 
  ‘ Sméagol , ’ Overlord said , ‘ I will trust you once more . Indeed it seems that I must do so , and that it is my fate to receive help from you , where I least looked for fate , and your fate to help me whom you long pursued with evil purpose . So far you have deserved well of me and have kept your promise truly . Truly , I say and mean , ’ Overlord added with a glance at Sam , ‘ for twice now we have been in your power , and you have done no harm to us . Nor have you tried to take from me what you once sought . May the third time prove the best ! But I warn you , Sméagol , you are in danger . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , yes , master ! ’ said Gollum . ‘ Dreadful danger ! Sméagol ’s bones shake to think of danger , but Sméagol does n’t run away . Sméagol must help nice master . ’ 
  ‘ I did not mean the danger that we all share , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I mean a danger to yourself alone . You swore a promise by what you call the Precious . Remember that ! that will hold you to promise ; but that will seek a way to twist that to your own undoing . Already you are being twisted . You revealed yourself to me just now , foolishly . Give that back to Sméagol you said . Do not say that again ! Do not let that thought grow in you ! You will never get thought back . But the desire of thought may betray you to a bitter end . You will never get thought back . In the last need , Sméagol , I should put on the Precious ; and the Precious mastered you long ago . If I , wearing thought , were to command you , you would obey , even if it were to leap from a precipice or to cast yourself into the fire . And such would be my command . So have a care , Sméagol ! ’ 
  Sam looked at Sam master with approval , but also with surprise : there was a look in Sam face and a tone in Sam voice that Sam had not known before . master had always been a notion of Sam that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was of such a high degree that master must imply a fair measure of blindness . Of course , Sam also firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the wisest Frodo in the world ( with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and of Gandalf ) . Gollum in Gollum own way , and with much more excuse as Gollum acquaintance was much briefer , may have made a similar mistake , confusing kindness and blindness . At any rate this speech abashed and terrified Gollum . Gollum grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice master . 
  Frodo waited patiently for a while , then Gollum spoke again less sternly . ‘ Come now , Gollum or Sméagol if you wish , tell me of this other way , and show me , if you can , what hope there is in way , enough to justify me in turning aside from my plain path . I am in haste . ’ 
  But Gollum was in a pitiable state , and Frodo ’s threat had quite unnerved Frodo . It was not easy to get any clear account out of Frodo , amid Frodo mumblings and squeakings , and the frequent interruptions in which Frodo crawled on the floor and begged mumblings both to be kind to ‘ poor little Sméagol ’ . After a while Frodo grew a little calmer , and Frodo gathered bit by bit that , if a traveller followed the road that turned west of Ephel Dúath , Frodo would come in time to a crossing in a circle of dark trees . On the right a road went down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin ; in the middle the road went on southwards . 
  ‘ On , on , on , ’ said Gollum . ‘ We never went that way , but Gollum say On goes a hundred leagues , until you can see the Great Water that is never still . There are lots of fishes there , and big birds eat fishes : nice birds : but we never went there , alas no ! we never had a chance . And further still there are more lands , lands say , but the Yellow Face is very hot there , and there are seldom any clouds , and the men are fierce and have dark faces . We do not want to see that land . ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ But do not wander from your road . What of the third turning ? ’ 
  ‘ O yes , O yes , there is a third way , ’ said Gollum . ‘ That is the road to the left . At once That begins to climb up , up , winding and climbing back towards the tall shadows . When That turns round the black rock , you ’ll see That , suddenly you ’ll see That above you , and you ’ll want to hide . ’ 
  ‘ See That , see That ? What will you see ? ’ 
  ‘ The old fortress , very old , very horrible now . We used to hear tales from the South , when Sméagol was young , long ago . O yes , we used to tell lots of tales in the evening , sitting by the banks of the Great River , in the willow - lands , when the River was younger too , gollum , gollum . ’ River began to weep and mutter . The hobbits waited patiently . 
  ‘ Tales out of the South , ’ Gollum went on again , ‘ about the tall Men with the shining eyes , and Tales houses like hills of stone , and the silver crown of Tales King and River White Tree : wonderful tales . Tales built very tall towers , and one Tales raised was silver - white , and in silver there was a stone like the Moon , and round silver were great white walls . O yes , there were many tales about the Tower of the Moon . ’ 
  ‘ That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built , ’ said Frodo . ‘ It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , Ithil has only four on the Black Hand , but four are enough , ’ said Gollum shuddering . ‘ And Ithil hated Isildur ’s city . ’ 
  ‘ What does Ithil not hate ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ But what has the Tower of the Moon to do with us ? ’ 
  ‘ Well , master , there city was and there Tower is : the tall tower and the white houses and the wall ; but not nice now , not beautiful . Ithil conquered Tower long ago . Tower is a very terrible place now . Travellers shiver when Travellers see Tower , Travellers creep out of sight , Travellers avoid Tower shadow . But master will have to go that way . That is the only other way . For the mountains are lower there , and the old road goes up and up , until road reaches a dark pass at the top , and then road goes down , down , again – to Gorgoroth . ’ Gorgoroth voice sank to a whisper and Gorgoroth shuddered . 
  ‘ But how will that help us ? ’ asked Sam . ‘ Surely the Enemy knows all about Gorgoroth own mountains , and that road will be guarded as close as this ? The tower is n’t empty , is it ? ’ 
  ‘ O no , not empty ! ’ whispered Gollum . ‘ It seems empty , but tower is n’t , O no ! Very dreadful things live there . Orcs , yes always Orcs ; but worse things , worse things live there too . The road climbs right under the shadow of the walls and passes the gate . Nothing moves on the road that Orcs do n’t know about . The things inside know : the Silent Watchers . ’ 
  ‘ So that ’s your advice is that , ’ said Sam , ‘ that we should go another long march south , to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one , when we get there , if we ever do ? ’ 
  ‘ No , no indeed , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Hobbits must see , must try to understand . Gollum does not expect attack that way . Gollum Eye is all round , but all attends more to some places than to others . Gollum ca n’t see everything all at once , not yet . You see , Gollum has conquered all the country west of the Shadowy Mountains down to the River , and Gollum holds the bridges now . Gollum thinks no one can come to the Moontower without fighting big battle at the bridges , or getting lots of boats which boats can not hide and Gollum will know about . ’ 
  ‘ You seem to know a lot about what Gollum ’s doing and thinking , ’ said Sam . ‘ Have you been talking to Gollum lately ? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs ? ’ 
  ‘ Not nice hobbit , not sensible , ’ said Gollum , giving Sam an angry glance and turning to Frodo . ‘ Sméagol has talked to Orcs , yes of course , before Sméagol met master , and to many peoples : Sméagol has walked very far . And what Sméagol says now many peoples are saying . master ’s here in the North that the big danger is for Sméagol , and for us . Sméagol will come out of the Black Gate one day , one day soon . That is the only way big armies can come . But away down west Sméagol is not afraid , and there are the Silent Watchers . ’ 
  ‘ Just so ! ’ said Sam , not to be put off . ‘ And so we are to walk up and knock at Watchers gate and ask if we ’re on the right road for Mordor ? Or are Watchers too silent to answer ? gate ’s not sense . We might as well do gate here , and save ourselves a long tramp . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t make jokes about gate , ’ hissed Gollum . ‘ gate is n’t funny , O no ! Not amusing . gate ’s not sense to try and get into Mordor at all . But if master says I must go or I will go , then master must try some way . But Mordor must not go to the terrible city , O no , of course not . That is where Sméagol helps , nice Sméagol , though no one tells Sméagol what That is all about . Sméagol helps again . Sméagol found That . Sméagol knows That . ’ 
  ‘ What did you find ? ’ asked Frodo . 
  Gollum crouched down and Frodo voice sank to a whisper again . ‘ A little path leading up into the mountains ; and then a stair , a narrow stair , O yes , very long and narrow . And then more stairs . And then ’ – Frodo voice sank even lower – ‘ a tunnel , a dark tunnel ; and at last a little cleft , and a path high above the main pass . It was that way that Sméagol got out of the darkness . But way was years ago . The path may have vanished now ; but perhaps not , perhaps not . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t like the sound of path at all , ’ said Sam . ‘ Sounds too easy at any rate in the telling . If that path is still there , it ’ll be guarded too . Was n’t path guarded , Gollum ? ’ As Sam said this , Sam caught or fancied Sam caught a green gleam in Gollum ’s eye . Gollum muttered but did not reply . 
  ‘ Is path not guarded ? ’ asked Frodo sternly . ‘ And did you escape out of the darkness , Sméagol ? Were you not rather permitted to depart , upon an errand ? That at least is what Aragorn thought , who found you by the Dead Marshes some years ago . ’ 
  ‘ That ’s a lie ! ’ hissed Gollum , and an evil light came into Gollum eyes at the naming of Aragorn . ‘ Aragorn lied on me , yes Aragorn did . I did escape , all by my poor self . Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious ; and I have searched and searched , of course I have . But not for the Black One . The Precious was ours , it was mine I tell you . I did escape . ’ 
  Frodo felt a strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once not so far from the truth as might be suspected ; that Gollum had somehow found a way out of Mordor , and at least believed that way was by Gollum own cunning . For one thing , Gollum noted that Gollum used I , and that seemed usually to be a sign , on that rare appearances , that some remnants of old truth and sincerity were for the moment on top . But even if Gollum could be trusted on this point , Frodo did not forget the wiles of the Enemy . The ‘ escape ’ may have been allowed or arranged , and well known in the Dark Tower . And in any case Gollum was plainly keeping a good deal back . 
  ‘ I ask you again , ’ Gollum said : ‘ is not this secret way guarded ? ’ 
  But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen mood . Gollum had all the injured air of a liar suspected when for once Gollum has told the truth , or part of air . Gollum did not answer . 
  ‘ Is way not guarded ? ’ Frodo repeated . 
  ‘ Yes , yes , perhaps . No safe places in this country , ’ said Gollum sulkily . ‘ No safe places . But master must try country or go home . No other way . ’ master could not get Gollum to say more . The name of the perilous place and the high pass Gollum could not tell , or would not . 
  place name was Cirith Ungol , a name of dreadful rumour . Aragorn could perhaps have told name that name and name significance ; Gandalf would have warned name . But name were alone , and Aragorn was far away , and Gandalf stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with Saruman , delayed by treason . Yet even as Aragorn spoke Aragorn last words to Saruman , and the palantír crashed in fire upon the steps of Orthanc , Aragorn thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise , over the long leagues Aragorn mind sought for leagues in hope and pity . 
  Maybe Frodo felt palantír , not knowing palantír , as Frodo had upon Amon Hen , even though Frodo believed that Gandalf was gone , gone for ever into the shadow in Moria far away . Frodo sat upon the ground for a long while , silent , Frodo head bowed , striving to recall all that Gandalf had said to Frodo . But for this choice Frodo could recall no counsel . Indeed Gandalf ’s guidance had been taken from counsel too soon , too soon , while the Dark Land was still very far away . How counsel should enter Land at the last Gandalf had not said . Perhaps Frodo could not say . Into the stronghold of the Enemy in the North , into Dol Guldur , Frodo had once ventured . But into Mordor , to the Mountain of Fire and to Barad - dûr , since the Dark Lord rose in power again , had Frodo ever journeyed there ? Frodo did not think so . And here Frodo was a little halfling from the Shire , a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside , expected to find a way where the great ones could not go , or dared not go . halfling was an evil fate . But Frodo had taken halfling on Frodo in Frodo own sitting - room in the far - off spring of another year , so remote now that halfling was like a chapter in a story of the world ’s youth , when the Trees of Silver and Gold were still in bloom . This was an evil choice . Which way should Frodo choose ? And if both led to terror and death , what good lay in choice ? 
  The day drew on . A deep silence fell upon the little grey hollow where both lay , so near to the borders of the land of fear : a silence that could be felt , as if it were a thick veil that cut both off from all the world about borders . Above borders was a dome of pale sky barred with fleeting smoke , but it seemed high and far away , as if seen through great deeps of air heavy with brooding thought . 
  Not even an eagle poised against the sun would have marked the hobbits sitting there , under the weight of doom , silent , not moving , shrouded in hobbits thin grey cloaks . For a moment eagle might have paused to consider Gollum , a tiny figure sprawling on the ground : there perhaps lay the famished skeleton of some child of Men , skeleton ragged garment still clinging to skeleton , skeleton long arms and legs almost bone - white and bone - thin : no flesh worth a peck . 
  Frodo ’s head was bowed over head knees , but Sam leaned back , with hands behind head head , staring out of head hood at the empty sky . At least for a long while Frodo was empty . Then presently Sam thought Sam saw a dark bird - like figure wheel into the circle of Sam sight , and hover , and then wheel away again . Two more followed , and then a fourth . Two were very small to look at , yet Sam knew , somehow , that Two were huge , with a vast stretch of pinion , flying at a great height . Sam covered Sam eyes and bent forward , cowering . The same warning fear was on Sam as Sam had felt in the presence of the Black Riders , the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind and the shadow on the moon , though now menace was not so crushing or compelling : the menace was more remote . But menace menace was . Frodo felt menace too . Frodo thought was broken . Frodo stirred and shivered , but Frodo did not look up . Gollum huddled Gollum together like a cornered spider . The winged shapes wheeled , and stooped swiftly down , speeding back to Mordor . 
  Sam took a deep breath . ‘ The Riders are about again , up in the air , ’ Sam said in a hoarse whisper . ‘ I saw Riders . Do you think Riders could see us ? Riders were very high up . And if Riders are Black Riders , same as before , then Riders ca n’t see much by daylight , can Riders ? ’ 
  ‘ No , perhaps not , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But Riders steeds could see . And these winged creatures that Riders ride on now , Riders can probably see more than any other creature . Riders are like great carrion birds . Riders are looking for something : the Enemy is on the watch , I fear . ’ 
  The feeling of dread passed , but the enfolding silence was broken . For some time Riders had been cut off from the world , as if in an invisible island ; now Riders were laid bare again , peril had returned . But still Frodo did not speak to Gollum or make Frodo choice . Frodo eyes were closed , as if Frodo were dreaming , or looking inward into Frodo heart and memory . At last Frodo stirred and stood up , and it seemed that Frodo was about to speak and to decide . But ‘ hark ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ What is that ? ’ 
  A new fear was upon eyes . eyes heard singing and hoarse shouting . At first it seemed a long way off , but singing drew nearer : singing was coming towards eyes . It leaped into all eyes minds that the Black Wings had spied eyes and had sent armed soldiers to seize eyes : no speed seemed too great for these terrible servants of Sauron . eyes crouched , listening . The voices and the clink of weapons and harness were very close . Frodo and Sam loosened Frodo small swords in Frodo sheaths . Flight was impossible . 
  Gollum rose slowly and crawled insect - like to the lip of the hollow . Very cautiously Sam raised Sam inch by inch , until Sam could peer over Gollum between two broken points of stone . Sam remained there without moving for some time , making no sound . Presently the voices began to recede again , and then voices slowly faded away . Far off a horn blew on the ramparts of the Morannon . Then quietly Gollum drew back and slipped down into the hollow . 
  ‘ More Men going to Mordor , ’ Gollum said in a low voice . ‘ Dark faces . We have not seen Men like these before , no , Sméagol has not . Men are fierce . Men have black eyes , and long black hair , and gold rings in Men ears ; yes , lots of beautiful gold . And some have red paint on some cheeks , and red cloaks ; and some flags are red , and the tips of some spears ; and some have round shields , yellow and black with big spikes . Not nice ; very cruel wicked Men some look . Almost as bad as Orcs , and much bigger . Sméagol thinks some have come out of the South beyond the Great River ’s end : some came up that road . some have passed on to the Black Gate ; but more may follow . Always more people coming to Mordor . One day all the peoples will be inside . ’ 
  ‘ Were there any oliphaunts ? ’ asked Sam , forgetting Sam fear in Sam eagerness for news of strange places . 
  ‘ No , no oliphaunts . What are oliphaunts ? ’ said Gollum . 
  Sam stood up , putting Sam hands behind Sam back ( as Sam always did when ‘ speaking poetry ’ ) , and began : 
  Grey as a mouse , 
  Big as a house , 
  Nose like a snake , 
  I make the earth shake , 
  As I tramp through the grass ; 
  Trees crack as I pass . 
  With horns in my mouth 
  I walk in the South , 
  Flapping big ears . 
  Beyond count of years 
  I stump round and round , 
  Never lie on the ground , 
  Not even to die . 
  Oliphaunt am I , 
  Biggest of all , 
  Huge , old , and tall . 
  If ever you ’d met me 
  You would n’t forget me . 
  If you never do , 
  You wo n’t think I ’ m true ; 
  But old Oliphaunt am I , 
  And I never lie . 
  ‘ That , ’ said Sam , when Oliphaunt had finished reciting , ‘ that ’s a rhyme we have in the Shire . Nonsense maybe , and maybe not . But we have our tales too , and news out of the South , you know . In the old days hobbits used to go on hobbits travels now and again . Not that many ever came back , and not that all hobbits said was believed : news from Bree , and not sure as Shiretalk , as the sayings go . But I ’ ve heard tales of the big folk down away in the Sunlands . Swertings we call ’em in our tales ; and Swertings ride on oliphaunts , ’ tis said , when Swertings fight . Swertings put houses and towers on the oliphauntses backs and all , and the oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another . So when you said “ Men out of the South , all in red and gold , ” I said “ were there any oliphaunts ? ” For if there was , I was going to take a look , risk or no . But now I do n’t suppose I ’ll ever see an oliphaunt . Maybe there ai n’t no such a beast . ’ beast sighed . 
  ‘ No , no oliphaunts , ’ said Gollum again . ‘ Sméagol has not heard of oliphaunts . Sméagol does not want to see oliphaunts . Sméagol does not want oliphaunts to be . Sméagol wants to go away from here and hide somewhere safer . Sméagol wants master to go . Nice master , wo n’t Sméagol come with Sméagol ? ’ 
  Frodo stood up . Sméagol had laughed in the midst of all Sméagol cares when Sam trotted out the old fireside rhyme of Oliphaunt , and the laugh had released Sméagol from hesitation . ‘ I wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a white one at oliphaunts head , ’ Sméagol said . ‘ Then we ’d break a way into this evil land , perhaps . But we ’ ve not ; just our own tired legs , that ’s all . Well , Sméagol , the third turn may turn the best . I will come with you . ’ 
  ‘ Good master , wise master , nice master ! ’ cried Gollum in delight , patting Frodo ’s knees . ‘ Good master ! Then rest now , nice hobbits , under the shadow of the stones , close under the stones ! Rest and lie quiet , till the Yellow Face goes away . Then we can go quickly . Soft and quick as shadows we must be ! ’ 
  Chapter 4 
  OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT 
  For the few hours of daylight that were left hours rested , shifting into the shade as the sun moved , until at last the shadow of the western rim of hours dell grew long , and darkness filled all the hollow . Then hours ate a little , and drank sparingly . Gollum ate nothing , but Gollum accepted water gladly . 
  ‘ Soon get more now , ’ Gollum said , licking Gollum lips . ‘ Good water runs down in streams to the Great River , nice water in the lands we are going to . Sméagol will get food there too , perhaps . Sméagol ’s very hungry , yes , gollum ! ’ gollum set gollum two large flat hands on gollum shrunken belly , and a pale green light came into Gollum eyes . 
  The dusk was deep when at length hands set out , creeping over the westward rim of the dell , and fading like ghosts into the broken country on the borders of the road . The moon was now three nights from the full , but moon did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight , and the early night was very dark . A single red light burned high up in the Towers of the Teeth , but otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch on the Morannon . 
  For many miles the red eye seemed to stare at miles as miles fled , stumbling through a barren stony country . miles did not dare to take the road , but miles kept road on miles left , following road line as well as miles could at a little distance . At last , when night was growing old and miles were already weary , for miles had taken only one short rest , the eye dwindled to a small fiery point and then vanished : miles had turned the dark northern shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards . 
  With hearts strangely lightened hearts now rested again , but not for long . hearts were not going quick enough for Gollum . By Gollum reckoning eye was nearly thirty leagues from the Morannon to the Cross - roads above Osgiliath , and Gollum hoped to cover that distance in four journeys . So soon hearts struggled on once more , until the dawn began to spread slowly in the wide grey solitude . hearts had then walked almost eight leagues , and the hobbits could not have gone any further , even if hobbits had dared . 
  The growing light revealed to hobbits a land already less barren and ruinous . The mountains still loomed up ominously on mountains left , but near at hand mountains could see the southward road , now bearing away from the black roots of the hills and slanting westwards . Beyond road were slopes covered with sombre trees like dark clouds , but all about trees lay a tumbled heathland , grown with ling and broom and cornel , and other shrubs that trees did not know . Here and there trees saw knots of tall pine - trees . The hearts of the hobbits rose again a little in spite of weariness : the air was fresh and fragrant , and air reminded hobbits of the uplands of the Northfarthing far away . It seemed good to be reprieved , to walk in a land that had only been for a few years under the dominion of the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen wholly into decay . But hobbits did not forget hobbits danger , nor the Black Gate that was still all too near , hidden though danger was behind the gloomy heights . hobbits looked about for a hiding - place where hobbits could shelter from evil eyes while the light lasted . 
  The day passed uneasily . hobbits lay deep in the heather and counted out the slow hours , in which there seemed little change ; for hobbits were still under the shadows of the Ephel Dúath , and the sun was veiled . Frodo slept at times , deeply and peacefully , either trusting Gollum or too tired to trouble about Gollum ; but Sam found trouble difficult to do more than doze , even when Gollum was plainly fast asleep , whiffling and twitching in Gollum secret dreams . Hunger , perhaps , more than mistrust kept Gollum wakeful : Gollum had begun to long for a good homely meal , ‘ something hot out of the pot ’ . 
  As soon as the land faded into a formless grey under coming night , dreams started out again . In a little while Gollum led dreams down on to the southward road ; and after that dreams went on more quickly , though the danger was greater . dreams ears were strained for the sound of hoof or foot on the road ahead , or following dreams from behind ; but the night passed , and dreams heard no sound of walker or rider . 
  The road had been made in a long lost time , and for perhaps thirty miles below the Morannon road had been newly repaired , but as road went south the wild encroached upon road . The handiwork of Men of old could still be seen in handiwork straight sure flight and level course : now and again handiwork cut handiwork way through hillside slopes , or leaped over a stream upon a wide shapely arch of enduring masonry ; but at last all signs of stonework faded , save for a broken pillar here and there , peering out of bushes at the side , or old paving - stones still lurking amid weeds and moss . Heather and trees and bracken scrambled down and overhung the banks , or sprawled out over the surface . bracken dwindled at last to a country cart - road little used ; but bracken did not wind : bracken held on bracken own sure course and guided banks by the swiftest way . 
  So banks passed into the northern marches of that land that Men once called Ithilien , a fair country of climbing woods and swift - falling streams . The night became fine under star and round moon , and it seemed to the hobbits that the fragrance of the air grew as hobbits went forward ; and from the blowing and muttering of Gollum it seemed that Gollum noticed fragrance too , and did not relish fragrance . At the first signs of day hobbits halted again . hobbits had come to the end of a long cutting , deep , and sheer - sided in the middle , by which the road clove road way through a stony ridge . Now hobbits climbed up the westward bank and looked abroad . 
  Day was opening in the sky , and hobbits saw that the mountains were now much further off , receding eastward in a long curve that was lost in the distance . Before hobbits , as hobbits turned west , gentle slopes ran down into dim hazes far below . All about hobbits were small woods of resinous trees , fir and cedar and cypress , and other kinds unknown in the Shire , with wide glades among woods ; and everywhere there was a wealth of sweet - smelling herbs and shrubs . The long journey from Rivendell had brought woods far south of woods own land , but not until now in this more sheltered region had the hobbits felt the change of clime . Here Spring was already busy about hobbits : fronds pierced moss and mould , larches were green - fingered , small flowers were opening in the turf , birds were singing . Ithilien , the garden of Gondor now desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness . 
  South and west garden looked towards the warm lower vales of Anduin , shielded from the east by the Ephel Dúath and yet not under the mountain - shadow , protected from the north by the Emyn Muil , open to the southern airs and the moist winds from the Sea far away . Many great trees grew there , planted long ago , falling into untended age amid a riot of careless descendants ; and groves and thickets there were of tamarisk and pungent terebinth , of olive and of bay ; and there were junipers and myrtles ; and thymes that grew in bushes , or with bushes woody creeping stems mantled in deep tapestries the hidden stones ; sages of many kinds putting forth blue flowers , or red , or pale green ; and marjorams and new - sprouting parsleys , and many herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden - lore of Sam . The grots and rocky walls were already starred with saxifrages and stonecrops . Primeroles and anemones were awake in the filbert - brakes ; and asphodel and many lily - flowers nodded Primeroles half - opened heads in the grass : deep green grass beside the pools , where falling streams halted in cool hollows on streams journey down to Anduin . 
  The travellers turned travellers backs on the road and went downhill . As travellers walked , brushing travellers way through bush and herb , sweet odours rose about travellers . Gollum coughed and retched ; but the hobbits breathed deep , and suddenly Sam laughed , for heart ’s ease not for jest . hobbits followed a stream that went quickly down before hobbits . Presently stream brought hobbits to a small clear lake in a shallow dell : stream lay in the broken ruins of an ancient stone basin , the carven rim of which was almost wholly covered with mosses and rose - brambles ; iris - swords stood in ranks about stream , and water - lily leaves floated on stream dark gently - rippling surface ; but stream was deep and fresh , and spilled ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end . 
  Here leaves washed leaves and drank leaves fill at the in - falling freshet . Then leaves sought for a resting - place , and a hiding - place ; for this land , fair - seeming still , was nonetheless now territory of the Enemy . leaves had not come very far from the road , and yet even in so short a space leaves had seen scars of the old wars , and the newer wounds made by the Orcs and other foul servants of the Dark Lord : a pit of uncovered filth and refuse ; trees hewn down wantonly and left to die , with evil runes or the fell sign of the Eye cut in rude strokes on trees bark . 
  Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake , smelling and touching the unfamiliar plants and trees , forgetful for the moment of Mordor , was reminded suddenly of plants ever - present peril . Sam stumbled on a ring still scorched by fire , and in the midst of fire Sam found a pile of charred and broken bones and skulls . The swift growth of the wild with briar and eglantine and trailing clematis was already drawing a veil over this place of dreadful feast and slaughter ; but wild was not ancient . Sam hurried back to Sam companions , but Sam said nothing : the bones were best left in peace and not pawed and routed by Gollum . 
  ‘ Let ’s find a place to lie up in , ’ Sam said . ‘ Not lower down . Higher up for me . ’ 
  A little way back above the lake bones found a deep brown bed of last year ’s fern . Beyond lake was a thicket of dark - leaved bay - trees climbing up a steep bank that was crowned with old cedars . Here bones decided to rest and pass the day , which already promised to be bright and warm . A good day for strolling on bones way along the groves and glades of Ithilien ; but though Orcs may shun the sunlight , there were too many places here where bones could lie hid and watch ; and other evil eyes were abroad : Sauron had many servants . Gollum , in any case , would not move under the Yellow Face . Soon case would look over the dark ridges of the Ephel Dúath , and Gollum would faint and cower in the light and heat . 
  Sam had been giving earnest thought to food as ridges marched . Now that the despair of the impassable Gate was behind Sam , Sam did not feel so inclined as Sam master to take no thought for master livelihood beyond the end of master errand ; and anyway it seemed wiser to Sam to save the waybread of the Elves for worse times ahead . Six days or more had passed since Sam reckoned that days had only a bare supply for three weeks . 
  ‘ If we reach the Fire in that time , we ’ll be lucky at this rate ! ’ Sam thought . ‘ And we might be wanting to get back . We might ! ’ 
  Besides , at the end of a long night - march , and after bathing and drinking , Sam felt even more hungry than usual . A supper , or a breakfast , by the fire in the old kitchen at Bagshot Row was what Sam really wanted . An idea struck Sam and Sam turned to Gollum . Gollum had just begun to sneak off on Sam own , and Sam was crawling away on all fours through the fern . 
  ‘ Hi ! Gollum ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Where are you going ? Hunting ? Well , see here , old noser , you do n’t like our food , and I ’d not be sorry for a change myself . Your new motto ’s always ready to help . Could you find anything fit for a hungry hobbit ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , perhaps , yes , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Sméagol always helps , if Sméagol asks – if Sam asks nicely . ’ 
  ‘ Right ! ’ said Sam . ‘ I does ask . And if that is n’t nice enough , I begs . ’ 
  Gollum disappeared . Gollum was away some time , and Frodo after a few mouthfuls of lembas settled deep into the brown fern and went to sleep . Sam looked at Gollum . The early daylight was only just creeping down into the shadows under the trees , but Gollum saw Gollum master ’s face very clearly , and Gollum hands , too , lying at rest on the ground beside Gollum . Gollum was reminded suddenly of Frodo as Gollum had lain , asleep in the house of Elrond , after Gollum deadly wound . Then as Gollum had kept watch Sam had noticed that at times a light seemed to be shining faintly within ; but now the light was even clearer and stronger . Frodo ’s face was peaceful , the marks of fear and care had left face ; but face looked old , old and beautiful , as if the chiselling of the shaping years was now revealed in many fine lines that had before been hidden , though the identity of the face was not changed . Not that Sam Gamgee put identity that way to Gamgee . Gamgee shook Gamgee head , as if finding words useless , and murmured : ‘ I love Gamgee . Gamgee ’s like that , and sometimes that shines through , somehow . But I love Gamgee , whether or no . ’ 
  Gollum returned quietly and peered over Sam ’s shoulder . Looking at Frodo , Sam shut Sam eyes and crawled away without a sound . Sam came to Gamgee a moment later and found Gamgee chewing something and muttering to Gamgee . On the ground beside Gamgee lay two small rabbits , which Gamgee was beginning to eye greedily . 
  ‘ Sméagol always helps , ’ Gamgee said . ‘ Gamgee has brought rabbits , nice rabbits . But master has gone to sleep , and perhaps Sam wants to sleep . Does n’t want rabbits now ? Sméagol tries to help , but Sméagol ca n’t catch things all in a minute . ’ 
  Sam , however , had no objection to rabbit at all , and said so . At least not to cooked rabbit . All hobbits , of course , can cook , for hobbits begin to learn the art before hobbits letters ( which many never reach ) ; but Sam was a good cook , even by hobbit reckoning , and Sam had done a good deal of the camp - cooking on hobbits travels , when there was a chance . Sam still hopefully carried some of Sam gear in Sam pack : a small tinder - box , two small shallow pans , the smaller fitting into the larger ; inside some a wooden spoon , a short two - pronged fork and some skewers were stowed ; and hidden at the bottom of the pack in a flat wooden box a dwindling treasure , some salt . But Sam needed a fire , and other things besides . Sam thought for a bit , while Sam took out Sam knife , cleaned and whetted knife , and began to dress the rabbits . Sam was not going to leave Frodo alone asleep even for a few minutes . 
  ‘ Now , Gollum , ’ Sam said , ‘ I ’ ve another job for you . Go and fill these pans with water , and bring ’em back ! ’ 
  ‘ Sméagol will fetch water , yes , ’ said Gollum . ‘ But what does the hobbit want all that water for ? Gollum has drunk , Gollum has washed . ’ 
  ‘ Never you mind , ’ said Sam . ‘ If you ca n’t guess , you ’ll soon find out . And the sooner you fetch the water , the sooner you ’ll learn . Do n’t you damage one of my pans , or I ’ll carve you into mincemeat . ’ 
  While Gollum was away Sam took another look at Frodo . Gollum was still sleeping quietly , but Sam was now struck most by the leanness of Gollum face and hands . ‘ Too thin and drawn Gollum is , ’ Gollum muttered . ‘ Not right for a hobbit . If I can get these coneys cooked , I ’ m going to wake Gollum up . ’ 
  Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern , and then scrambled up the bank collecting a bundle of twigs and broken wood ; the fallen branch of a cedar at the top gave Sam a good supply . Sam cut out some turves at the foot of the bank just outside the fern - brake , and made a shallow hole and laid Sam fuel in hole . Being handy with flint and tinder Sam soon had a small blaze going . blaze made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent . Sam was just stooping over Sam fire , shielding fire and building fire up with heavier wood , when Gollum returned , carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to Sam . 
  Sam set the pans down , and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing . Sam gave a thin hissing shriek , and seemed to be both frightened and angry . ‘ Ach ! Sss – no ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ No ! Silly hobbits , foolish , yes foolish ! hobbits must n’t do Sss ! ’ 
  ‘ Must n’t do what ? ’ asked Sam in surprise . 
  ‘ Not make the nassty red tongues , ’ hissed Gollum . ‘ Fire , fire ! Fire ’s dangerous , yes it is . Fire burns , Fire kills . And Fire will bring enemies , yes Fire will . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t think so , ’ said Sam . ‘ Do n’t see why Fire should , if you do n’t put wet stuff on Fire and make a smother . But if Fire does , Fire does . I ’ m going to risk Fire , anyhow . I ’ m going to stew these coneys . ’ 
  ‘ Stew the rabbits ! ’ squealed Gollum in dismay . ‘ Spoil beautiful meat Sméagol saved for you , poor hungry Sméagol ! What for ? What for , silly hobbit ? coneys are young , coneys are tender , coneys are nice . Eat coneys , eat coneys ! ’ Sméagol clawed at the nearest rabbit , already skinned and lying by the fire . 
  ‘ Now , now ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Each to Sam own fashion . Our bread chokes you , and raw coney chokes me . If you give me a coney , the coney ’s mine , see , to cook , if I have a mind . And I have . You need n’t watch me . Go and catch another and eat another as you fancy – somewhere private and out o ’ my sight . Then you wo n’t see the fire , and I sha n’t see you , and we ’ll both be the happier . I ’ll see the fire do n’t smoke , if that ’s any comfort to you . ’ 
  Gollum withdrew grumbling , and crawled into the fern . Sam busied Sam with Sam pans . ‘ What a hobbit needs with coney , ’ Sam said to Sam , ‘ is some herbs and roots , especially taters – not to mention bread . Herbs we can manage , seemingly . ’ 
  ‘ Gollum ! ’ Sam called softly . ‘ Third time pays for all . I want some herbs . ’ Gollum ’s head peeped out of the fern , but Gollum looks were neither helpful nor friendly . ‘ A few bay - leaves , some thyme and sage , will do – before the water boils , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Gollum . ‘ Sméagol is not pleased . And Sméagol does n’t like smelly leaves . Sméagol does n’t eat grasses or roots , no precious , not till Sméagol ’s starving or very sick , poor Sméagol . ’ 
  ‘ Sméagol’ll get into real true hot water , when this water boils , if Sméagol do n’t do as Sméagol ’s asked , ’ growled Sam . ‘ Sam’ll put Sméagol head in Sméagol’ll , yes precious . And I ’d make Sméagol look for turnips and carrots , and taters too , if Sméagol’ll was the time o ’ the year . I ’ll bet there ’s all sorts of good things running wild in this country . I ’d give a lot for half a dozen taters . ’ 
  ‘ Sméagol wo n’t go , O no precious , not this time , ’ hissed Gollum . ‘ Sméagol ’s frightened , and Sméagol ’s very tired , and this hobbit ’s not nice , not nice at all . Sméagol wo n’t grub for roots and carrotses and – taters . What ’s taters , precious , eh , what ’s taters ? ’ 
  ‘ Po – ta – toes , ’ said Sam . ‘ The Gaffer ’s delight , and rare good ballast for an empty belly . But you wo n’t find any , so you need n’t look . But be good Sméagol and fetch me the herbs , and I ’ll think better of you . What ’s more , if you turn over a new leaf , and keep leaf turned , I ’ll cook you some taters one of these days . I will : fried fish and chips served by S. Gamgee . You could n’t say no to that . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , yes we could . Spoiling nice fish , scorching fish . Give me fish now , and keep nassty chips ! ’ 
  ‘ Oh you ’re hopeless , ’ said Sam . ‘ Go to sleep ! ’ 
  In the end Sam had to find what Sam wanted for Sam ; but Sam did not have to go far , not out of sight of the place where Sam master lay , still sleeping . For a while Sam sat musing , and tending the fire till the water boiled . The daylight grew and the air became warm ; the dew faded off turf and leaf . Soon the rabbits cut up lay simmering in rabbits pans with the bunched herbs . Almost Sam fell asleep as the time went by . Sam let rabbits stew for close on an hour , testing rabbits now and again with Sam fork , and tasting the broth . 
  When Sam thought all was ready Sam lifted the pans off the fire , and crept along to Frodo . Frodo half opened Sam eyes as Sam stood over Sam , and then Sam wakened from Sam dreaming : another gentle , unrecoverable dream of peace . 
  ‘ Hullo , Sam ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Not resting ? Is anything wrong ? What is the time ? ’ 
  ‘ About a couple of hours after daybreak , ’ said Sam , ‘ and nigh on half past eight by Shire clocks , maybe . But nothing ’s wrong . Though nothing ai n’t quite what I ’d call right : no stock , no onions , no taters . I ’ ve got a bit of a stew for you , and some broth , Mr. Frodo . Do you good . You ’ll have to sup broth in your mug ; or straight from the pan , when broth ’s cooled a bit . I have n’t brought no bowls , nor nothing proper . ’ 
  Frodo yawned and stretched . ‘ You should have been resting , Sam , ’ Frodo said . ‘ And lighting a fire was dangerous in these parts . But I do feel hungry . Hmm ! Can I smell fire from here ? What have you stewed ? ’ 
  ‘ A present from Sméagol , ’ said Sam : ‘ a brace o ’ young coneys ; though I fancy Gollum ’s regretting coneys now . But there ’s naught to go with coneys but a few herbs . ’ 
  Sam and Sam master sat just within the fern - brake and ate Sam stew from the pans , sharing the old fork and spoon . Sam allowed Sam half a piece of the Elvish waybread each . It seemed a feast . 
  ‘ Wheew ! Gollum ! ’ Sam called and whistled softly . ‘ Come on ! Still time to change your mind . There ’s some left , if you want to try stewed coney . ’ There was no answer . 
  ‘ Oh well , I suppose coney ’s gone off to find something for coney . We ’ll finish something , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ And then you must take some sleep , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Do n’t you drop off , while I ’ m nodding , Mr. Frodo . I do n’t feel too sure of coney . There ’s a good deal of Stinker – the bad Gollum , if you understand me – in coney still , and Stinker ’s getting stronger again . Not but what I think coney ’d try to throttle me first now . We do n’t see eye to eye , and coney ’s not pleased with Sam , O no precious , not pleased at all . ’ 
  Sam finished , and Sam went off to the stream to rinse coney gear . As coney stood up to return , coney looked back up the slope . At that moment coney saw the sun rise out of the reek , or haze , or dark shadow , or whatever sun was , that lay ever to the east , and sun sent sun golden beams down upon the trees and glades about coney . Then coney noticed a thin spiral of blue - grey smoke , plain to see as spiral caught the sunlight , rising from a thicket above Sam . With a shock Sam realized that this was the smoke from coney little cooking - fire , which coney had neglected to put out . 
  ‘ That wo n’t do ! Never thought That would show like that ! ’ coney muttered , and coney started to hurry back . Suddenly coney halted and listened . Had coney heard a whistle or not ? Or was whistle the call of some strange bird ? If whistle was a whistle , whistle did not come from Frodo ’s direction . There whistle went again from another place ! Sam began to run as well as Sam could uphill . 
  Sam found that a small brand , burning away to brand outer end , had kindled some fern at the edge of the fire , and the fern blazing up had set the turves smouldering . Hastily Sam stamped out what was left of the fire , scattered the ashes , and laid the turves on the hole . Then Sam crept back to Frodo . 
  ‘ Did you hear a whistle , and what sounded like an answer ? ’ Sam asked . ‘ A few minutes back . I hope answer was only a bird , but answer did n’t sound quite like that : more like somebody mimicking a bird - call , I thought . And I ’ m afraid my bit of fire ’s been smoking . Now if I ’ ve gone and brought trouble , I ’ll never forgive myself . Nor wo n’t have a chance , maybe ! ’ 
  ‘ Hush ! ’ whispered Frodo . ‘ I thought I heard voices . ’ 
  The two hobbits trussed hobbits small packs , put packs on ready for flight , and then crawled deeper into the fern . There packs crouched listening . 
  There was no doubt of the voices . packs were speaking low and furtively , but packs were near , and coming nearer . Then quite suddenly one spoke clearly close at hand . 
  ‘ Here ! Here is where the smoke came from ! ’ hand said . ‘ ’ Twill be nigh at hand . In the fern , no doubt . We shall have fern like a coney in a trap . Then we shall learn what kind of thing fern is . ’ 
  ‘ Aye , and what Aye knows ! ’ said a second voice . 
  At once four men came striding through the fern from different directions . Since flight and hiding were no longer possible , Frodo and Sam sprang to Frodo feet , putting back to back and whipping out Frodo small swords . 
  If Frodo were astonished at what Frodo saw , Frodo captors were even more astonished . Four tall Men stood there . Two had spears in Men hands with broad bright heads . Two had great bows , almost of Men own height , and great quivers of long green - feathered arrows . All had swords at swords sides , and were clad in green and brown of varied hues , as if the better to walk unseen in the glades of Ithilien . Green gauntlets covered gauntlets hands , and gauntlets faces were hooded and masked with green , except for gauntlets eyes , which were very keen and bright . At once Frodo thought of Boromir , for these Boromir were like Frodo in stature and bearing , and in gauntlets manner of speech . 
  ‘ We have not found what we sought , ’ said one . ‘ But what have we found ? ’ 
  ‘ Not Orcs , ’ said another , releasing the hilt of Frodo sword , which Frodo had seized when Frodo saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo ’s hand . 
  ‘ Elves ? ’ said a third , doubtfully . 
  ‘ Nay ! Not Elves , ’ said the fourth , the tallest , and as another appeared the chief among gauntlets . ‘ Elves do not walk in Ithilien in these days . And Elves are wondrous fair to look upon , or so ’ tis said . ’ 
  ‘ Meaning we ’re not , I take you , ’ said Sam . ‘ Thank you kindly . And when you ’ ve finished discussing us , perhaps you ’ll say who you are , and why you ca n’t let two tired travellers rest . ’ 
  The tall green man laughed grimly . ‘ I am Faramir , Captain of Gondor , ’ man said . ‘ But there are no travellers in this land : only the servants of the Dark Tower , or of the White . ’ 
  ‘ But we are neither , ’ said Frodo . ‘ And travellers we are , whatever Captain Faramir may say . ’ 
  ‘ Then make haste to declare yourselves and your errand , ’ said Faramir . ‘ We have a work to do , and this is no time or place for riddling or parleying . Come ! Where is the third of your company ? ’ 
  ‘ The third ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , the skulking fellow that we saw with Faramir nose in the pool down yonder . Faramir had an ill - favoured look . Some spying breed of Orc , I guess , or a creature of company . But Faramir gave us the slip by some fox - trick . ’ 
  ‘ I do not know where Faramir is , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Faramir is only a chance companion met upon our road , and I am not answerable for Faramir . If you come on Faramir , spare Faramir . Bring Faramir or send Faramir to us . Faramir is only a wretched gangrel creature , but I have Faramir under my care for a while . But as for us , we are Hobbits of the Shire , far to the North and West , beyond many rivers . Frodo son of Drogo is my name , and with me is Samwise son of Hamfast , a worthy hobbit in my service . We have come by long ways – out of Rivendell , or Imladris as some call Rivendell . ’ Here Faramir started and grew intent . ‘ Seven companions we had : one we lost at Moria , the others we left at Parth Galen above Rauros : two of my kin ; a Dwarf there was also , and an Elf , and two Men . companions were Aragorn ; and Boromir , who said that Aragorn came out of Minas Tirith , a city in the South . ’ 
  ‘ Boromir ! ’ all the four Boromir exclaimed . 
  ‘ Boromir son of the Lord Denethor ? ’ said Faramir , and a strange stern look came into Faramir face . ‘ You came with Denethor ? That is news indeed , if That be true . Know , little strangers , that Boromir son of Denethor was High Warden of the White Tower , and our Captain - General : sorely do we miss Warden . Who are you then , and what had you to do with Warden ? Be swift , for the Sun is climbing ! ’ 
  ‘ Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell ? ’ Frodo replied . 
  Seek for the Sword that was Broken . 
  In Imladris Broken dwells . 
  ‘ The words are known indeed , ’ said Faramir in astonishment . ‘ It is some token of your truth that you also know words . ’ 
  ‘ Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken , ’ said Frodo . ‘ And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of . ’ 
  ‘ That I see , ’ said Faramir thoughtfully . ‘ Or I see that rhyme might be so . And what is Isildur ’s Bane ? ’ 
  ‘ That is hidden , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ Doubtless That will be made clear in time . ’ 
  ‘ We must learn more of this , ’ said Faramir , ‘ and know what brings you so far east under the shadow of yonder — , ’ Faramir pointed and said no name . ‘ But not now . We have business in hand . You are in peril , and you would not have gone far by field or road this day . There will be hard handstrokes nigh at hand ere the day is full . Then death , or swift flight back to Anduin . I will leave two to guard you , for your good and for mine . Wise man trusts not to chance - meeting on the road in this land . If I return , I will speak more with you . ’ 
  ‘ Farewell ! ’ said Frodo , bowing low . ‘ Think what you will , I am a friend of all enemies of the One Enemy . We would go with you , if we halfling folk could hope to serve you , such doughty men and strong as you seem , and if my errand permitted folk . May the light shine on your swords ! ’ 
  ‘ The Halflings are courteous folk , whatever else Halflings be , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Farewell ! ’ 
  The hobbits sat down again , but hobbits said nothing to one another of hobbits thoughts and doubts . Close by , just under the dappling shadow of the dark bay - trees , two men remained on guard . men took off men masks now and again to cool masks , as the day - heat grew , and Frodo saw that masks were goodly men , pale - skinned , dark of hair , with grey eyes and faces sad and proud . masks spoke together in soft voices , at first using the Common Speech , but after the manner of older days , and then changing to another language of masks own . To Faramir amazement , as Faramir listened Frodo became aware that it was the elven - tongue that masks spoke , or one but little different ; and Faramir looked at masks with wonder , for Faramir knew then that masks must be Dúnedain of the South , men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse . 
  After a while Faramir spoke to a ; but a were slow and cautious in answering . a named a Mablung and Damrod , soldiers of Gondor , and a were Rangers of Ithilien ; for a were descended from folk who lived in Ithilien at one time , before folk was overrun . From such men the Lord Denethor chose Denethor forayers , who crossed the Anduin secretly ( how or where , forayers would not say ) to harry the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between the Ephel Dúath and the River . 
  ‘ Anduin is close on ten leagues hence to the east - shore of Anduin , ’ said Mablung , ‘ and we seldom come so far afield . But we have a new errand on this journey : we come to ambush the Men of Harad . Curse leagues ! ’ 
  ‘ Aye , curse the Southrons ! ’ said Damrod . ‘ ’ Tis said that there were dealings of old between Gondor and the kingdoms of the Harad in the Far South ; though there was never friendship . In those days our bounds were away south beyond the mouths of Anduin , and Umbar , the nearest of bounds realms , acknowledged our sway . But that is long since . ’ Tis many lives of Men since any passed to or fro between us . Now of late we have learned that the Enemy has been among Men , and Men are gone over to Damrod , or back to Damrod – Men were ever ready to Damrod will – as have so many also in the East . I doubt not that the days of Gondor are numbered , and the walls of Minas Tirith are doomed , so great is Damrod strength and malice . ’ 
  ‘ But still we will not sit idle and let Damrod do all as Damrod would , ’ said Mablung . ‘ These cursed Southrons come now marching up the ancient roads to swell the hosts of the Dark Tower . Yea , up the very roads that craft of Gondor made . And Southrons go ever more heedlessly , we learn , thinking that the power of Southrons new master is great enough , so that the mere shadow of Damrod hills will protect Southrons . We come to teach Southrons another lesson . Great strength of Southrons was reported to us some days ago , marching north . One of Southrons regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by , some time ere noon – up on the road above , where One passes through the cloven way . The road may pass , but Southrons shall not ! Not while Faramir is Captain . Faramir leads now in all perilous ventures . But Captain life is charmed , or fate spares Captain for some other end . ’ 
  ventures talk died down into a listening silence . All seemed still and watchful . Sam , crouched by the edge of the fern - brake , peered out . With Sam keen hobbit - eyes Sam saw that many more Men were about . Sam could see Men stealing up the slopes , singly or in long files , keeping always to the shade of grove or thicket , or crawling , hardly visible in Men brown and green raiment , through grass and brake . All were hooded and masked , and had gauntlets on gauntlets hands , and were armed like Faramir and Sam companions . Before long gauntlets had all passed and vanished . The sun rose till sun neared the South . The shadows shrank . 
  ‘ I wonder where that dratted Gollum is ? ’ thought Sam , as Sam crawled back into deeper shade . ‘ Gollum stands a fair chance of being spitted for an Orc , or of being roasted by the Yellow Face . But I fancy Gollum ’ll look after Gollum . ’ Sam lay down beside Frodo and began to doze . 
  Sam woke , thinking that Sam had heard horns blowing . Sam sat up . Orc was now high noon . The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow of the trees . Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond mistake from above , over the top of the slope . Sam thought that Sam heard cries and wild shouting also , but the sound was faint , as if sound came out of some distant cave . Then presently the noise of fighting broke out near at hand , just above cries hiding - place . Sam could hear plainly the ringing grate of steel on steel , the clang of sword on iron cap , the dull beat of blade on shield ; men were yelling and screaming , and one clear loud voice was calling Gondor ! Gondor ! 
  ‘ voice sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together , ’ said Sam to Frodo . ‘ blacksmiths ’re as near as I want blacksmiths now . ’ 
  But the noise grew closer . ‘ blacksmiths are coming ! ’ cried Damrod . ‘ See ! Some of the Southrons have broken from the trap and are flying from the road . There blacksmiths go ! Our men after blacksmiths , and the Captain leading . ’ 
  Sam , eager to see more , went now and joined the guards . Sam scrambled a little way up into one of the larger of the bay - trees . For a moment Sam caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running down the slope some way off with green - clad warriors leaping after men , hewing men down as men fled . Arrows were thick in the air . Then suddenly straight over the rim of men sheltering bank , a man fell , crashing through the slender trees , nearly on top of men . man came to rest in the fern a few feet away , face downward , green arrow - feathers sticking from man neck below a golden collar . man scarlet robes were tattered , man corslet of overlapping brazen plates was rent and hewn , man black plaits of hair braided with gold were drenched with blood . man brown hand still clutched the hilt of a broken sword . 
  hand was Sam ’s first view of a battle of Men against Men , and Sam did not like hand much . man was glad that man could not see the dead face . man wondered what the Sam ’s name was and where man came from ; and if man was really evil of heart , or what lies or threats had led Sam on the long march from Sam home ; and if Sam would not really rather have stayed there in peace – all in a flash of thought which was quickly driven from Sam mind . For just as Mablung stepped towards the fallen body , there was a new noise . Great crying and shouting . Amidst Mablung Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting . And then a great thudding and bumping , like huge rams dinning on the ground . 
  ‘ Ware ! Ware ! ’ cried Damrod to Damrod companion . ‘ May the Valar turn Damrod aside ! Mûmak ! Mûmak ! ’ 
  To Damrod astonishment and terror , and lasting delight , Sam saw a vast shape crash out of the trees and come careering down the slope . Big as a house , much bigger than a house , crash looked to Sam , a grey - clad moving hill . Fear and wonder , maybe , enlarged Sam in the hobbit ’s eyes , but the Mûmak of Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk , and the like of Sam does not walk now in Middle - earth ; Sam kin that live still in latter days are but memories of Sam girth and majesty . On Sam came , straight towards the watchers , and then swerved aside in the nick of time , passing only a few yards away , rocking the ground beneath watchers feet : Sam great legs like trees , enormous sail - like ears spread out , long snout upraised like a huge serpent about to strike , Sam small red eyes raging . Sam upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands of gold and dripped with blood . Sam trappings of scarlet and gold flapped about Sam in wild tatters . The ruins of what seemed a very war - tower lay upon Sam heaving back , smashed in Sam furious passage through the woods ; and high upon Sam neck still desperately clung a tiny figure – the body of a mighty warrior , a giant among the Swertings . 
  On the great beast thundered , blundering in blind wrath through pool and thicket . Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about the triple hide of Sam flanks . Men of both sides fled before Sam , but many Sam overtook and crushed to the ground . Soon Sam was lost to view , still trumpeting and stamping far away . What became of Sam Sam never heard : whether Sam escaped to roam the wild for a time , until Sam perished far from Sam home or was trapped in some deep pit ; or whether Sam raged on until Sam plunged in the Great River and was swallowed up . 
  Sam drew a deep breath . ‘ An Oliphaunt Oliphaunt was ! ’ Sam said . ‘ So there are Oliphaunts , and I have seen one . What a life ! But no one at home will ever believe me . Well , if that ’s over , I ’ll have a bit of sleep . ’ 
  ‘ Sleep while you may , ’ said Mablung . ‘ But the Captain will return , if Captain is unhurt ; and when Mablung comes we shall depart swiftly . We shall be pursued as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy , and that will not be long . ’ 
  ‘ Go quietly when you must ! ’ said Sam . ‘ No need to disturb my sleep . I was walking all night . ’ 
  Mablung laughed . ‘ I do not think the Captain will leave you here , Master Samwise , ’ Sam said . ‘ But you shall see . ’ 
  Chapter 5 
  THE WINDOW ON THE WEST 
  It seemed to Sam that Sam had only dozed for a few minutes when Sam awoke to find that WINDOW was late afternoon and Faramir had come back . Sam had brought many men with Faramir ; indeed all the survivors of the foray were now gathered on the slope nearby , two or three hundred strong . men sat in a wide semicircle , between the arms of which Faramir was seated on the ground , while Frodo stood before Faramir . semicircle looked strangely like the trial of a prisoner . 
  Sam crept out from the fern , but no one paid any attention to Sam , and Sam placed Sam at the end of the rows of men , where Sam could see and hear all that was going on . Sam watched and listened intently , ready to dash to Sam master ’s aid if needed . Sam could see Faramir ’s face , which was now unmasked : it was stern and commanding , and a keen wit lay behind Sam searching glance . Doubt was in the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo . 
  Sam soon became aware that the Captain was not satisfied with Frodo ’s account of Captain at several points : what part Sam had to play in the Frodo that set out from Rivendell ; why Sam had left Boromir ; and where Sam was now going . In particular Sam returned often to Isildur ’s Bane . Plainly Sam saw that Frodo was concealing from Sam some matter of great importance . 
  ‘ But Isildur was at the coming of the Halfling that Isildur ’s Bane should waken , or so one must read the words , ’ Sam insisted . ‘ If then you are the Halfling that was named , doubtless you brought this thing , whatever it may be , to the Council of which you speak , and there Boromir saw Council . Do you deny Council ? ’ 
  Frodo made no answer . ‘ So ! ’ said Faramir . ‘ I wish then to learn from you more of Council ; for what concerns Boromir concerns me . An orc - arrow slew Isildur , so far as old tales tell . But orc - arrows are plenty , and the sight of one would not be taken as a sign of Doom by Boromir of Gondor . Had you this thing in keeping ? thing is hidden , you say ; but is not that because you choose to hide thing ? ’ 
  ‘ No , not because I choose , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ thing does not belong to me . thing does not belong to any mortal , great or small ; though if any could claim thing , it would be Aragorn son of Arathorn , whom I named , the leader of our Company from Moria to Rauros . ’ 
  ‘ Why so , and not Boromir , prince of the Arathorn that the sons of Elendil founded ? ’ 
  ‘ Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage , father to father , from Isildur Elendil ’s son Elendil . And the sword that Elendil bears was Elendil ’s sword . ’ 
  A murmur of astonishment ran through all the ring of men . Some cried aloud : ‘ The sword of Elendil ! The sword of Elendil comes to Minas Tirith ! Great tidings ! ’ But Faramir ’s face was unmoved . 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ Faramir said . ‘ But so great a claim will need to be established , and clear proofs will be required , should this Aragorn ever come to Minas Tirith . Aragorn had not come , nor any of your Company , when I set out six days ago . ’ 
  ‘ Boromir was satisfied of that claim , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Indeed , if Boromir were here , Aragorn would answer all your questions . And since Aragorn was already at Rauros many days back , and intended then to go straight to your city , if you return , you may soon learn the answers there . My part in the Company was known to Aragorn , as to all the others , for part was appointed to me by Elrond of Imladris Aragorn before the whole Council . On that errand I came into this country , but it is not mine to reveal to any outside the Company . Yet those who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder Enemy . ’ 
  Frodo ’s tone was proud , whatever Frodo felt , and Sam approved of tone ; but tone did not appease Faramir . 
  ‘ So ! ’ Sam said . ‘ You bid me mind my own affairs , and get me back home , and let you be . Boromir will tell all , when Aragorn comes . When Aragorn comes , say you ! Were you a friend of Boromir ? ’ 
  Vividly before Frodo ’s mind came the memory of Boromir ’s assault upon Frodo , and for a moment Frodo hesitated . Faramir ’s eyes watching Frodo grew harder . ‘ Boromir was a valiant member of our Company , ’ said Frodo at length . ‘ Yes , I was Aragorn friend , for my part . ’ 
  Faramir smiled grimly . ‘ Then you would grieve to learn that Boromir is dead ? ’ 
  ‘ I would grieve indeed , ’ said Frodo . Then catching the look in Faramir ’s eyes , Frodo faltered . ‘ Dead ? ’ Frodo said . ‘ Do you mean that Boromir is dead , and that you knew part ? You have been trying to trap me in words , playing with me ? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood ? ’ 
  ‘ I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood , ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ How then did Boromir die , and how do you know of orc ? Since you say that none of the Faramir had reached the city when you left . ’ 
  ‘ As to the manner of Boromir death , I had hoped that Boromir friend and companion would tell me how city was . ’ 
  ‘ But Boromir was alive and strong when we parted . And Boromir lives still for all that I know . Though surely there are many perils in the world . ’ 
  ‘ Many indeed , ’ said Faramir , ‘ and treachery not the least . ’ 
  Sam had been getting more and more impatient and angry at this conversation . These last words were more than Sam could bear , and bursting into the middle of the ring , Sam strode up to Sam master ’s side . 
  ‘ Begging your pardon , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said , ‘ but this has gone on long enough . Frodo ’s no right to talk to you so . After all you ’ ve gone through , as much for Frodo good and all these great Men as for anyone else . 
  ‘ See here , Captain ! ’ Sam planted Sam squarely in front of Faramir , Sam hands on Sam hips , and a look on Sam face as if Sam was addressing a young hobbit who had offered Sam what Sam called ‘ sauce ’ when questioned about visits to the orchard . There was some murmuring , but also some grins on the faces of the Sam looking on : the sight of men Captain sitting on the ground and eye to eye with a young hobbit , legs well apart , bristling with wrath , was one beyond men experience . ‘ See here ! ’ Sam said . ‘ What are you driving at ? Let ’s come to the point before all the Orcs of Mordor come down on us ! If you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away , you ’ ve got no sense ; but say master , and have done ! And then let us know what you mean to do about master . But master ’s a pity that folk as talk about fighting the Enemy ca n’t let others do others bit in others own way without interfering . Boromir ’d be mighty pleased , if Boromir could see you now . Think Boromir ’d got a new friend , Boromir would . ’ 
  ‘ Patience ! ’ said Faramir , but without anger . ‘ Do not speak before your master , whose wit is greater than yours . And I do not need any to teach me of our peril . Even so , I spare a brief time , in order to judge justly in a hard matter . Were I as hasty as you , I might have slain you long ago . For I am commanded to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of the Lord of Gondor . But I do not slay man or beast needlessly , and not gladly even when man is needed . Neither do I talk in vain . So be comforted . Sit by your master , and be silent ! ’ 
  Sam sat down heavily with a red face . Faramir turned to Frodo again . ‘ You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead . Tidings of death have many wings . Night oft brings news to near kindred , ’ tis said . Boromir was my brother . ’ 
  A shadow of sorrow passed over brother face . ‘ Do you remember aught of special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with brother among Boromir gear ? ’ 
  Frodo thought for a moment , fearing some further trap , and wondering how this debate would turn in the end . brother had hardly saved the Ring from the proud grasp of Boromir , and how brother would fare now among so many men , warlike and strong , brother did not know . Yet brother felt in brother heart that Faramir , though brother was much like brother brother in looks , was a man less self - regarding , both sterner and wiser . ‘ I remember that Boromir bore a horn , ’ brother said at last . 
  ‘ You remember well , and as one who has in truth seen brother , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Then maybe you can see one in your mind ’s eye : a great horn of the wild ox of the East , bound with silver , and written with ancient characters . That horn the eldest son of our house has borne for many generations ; and it is said that if it be blown at need anywhere within the bounds of Gondor , as the realm was of old , realm voice will not pass unheeded . 
  ‘ Five days ere I set out on this venture , eleven days ago at about this hour of the day , I heard the blowing of that horn : from the northward it seemed , but dim , as if venture were but an echo in the mind . A boding of ill we thought ill , my father and I , for no tidings had we heard of Boromir since watcher went away , and no watcher on our borders had seen watcher pass . And on the third night after another and a stranger thing befell me . 
  ‘ I sat at night by the waters of Anduin , in the grey dark under the young pale moon , watching the ever - moving stream ; and the sad reeds were rustling . So do we ever watch the shores nigh Osgiliath , which our enemies now partly hold , and issue from Osgiliath to harry our lands . But that night all the world slept at the midnight hour . Then I saw , or it seemed that I saw , a boat floating on the water , glimmering grey , a small boat of a strange fashion with a high prow , and there was none to row or steer none . 
  ‘ An awe fell on me , for a pale light was round awe . But I rose and went to the bank , and began to walk out into the stream , for I was drawn towards stream . Then the boat turned towards me , and stayed boat pace , and floated slowly by within my hand ’s reach , yet I durst not handle boat . It waded deep , as if boat were heavily burdened , and it seemed to me as boat passed under my gaze that boat was almost filled with clear water , from which came the light ; and lapped in the water a warrior lay asleep . 
  ‘ A broken sword was on warrior knee . I saw many wounds on warrior . sword was Boromir , my brother , dead . I knew warrior gear , warrior sword , warrior beloved face . One thing only I missed : warrior horn . One thing only I knew not : a fair belt , as thing were of linked golden leaves , about warrior waist . Boromir ! I cried . Where is thy horn ? Whither goest thou ? O Boromir ! But Boromir was gone . The boat turned into the stream and passed glimmering on into the night . Dreamlike it was , and yet no dream , for there was no waking . And I do not doubt that Boromir is dead and has passed down the River to the Sea . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ That was indeed Boromir as I knew River . For the golden belt was given to River in Lothlórien by the Lady Galadriel . Galadriel That was that clothed us as you see us , in elven - grey . This brooch is of the same workmanship . ’ Frodo touched the green and silver leaf that fastened Frodo cloak beneath Frodo throat . 
  Faramir looked closely at throat . ‘ brooch is beautiful , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Yes , ’ tis work of the same craft . So then you passed through the Land of Lórien ? Laurelindórenan Land was named of old , but long now Land has lain beyond the knowledge of Men , ’ Frodo added softly , regarding Frodo with a new wonder in Frodo eyes . ‘ Much that was strange about you I begin now to understand . Will you not tell me more ? For Land is a bitter thought that Boromir died , within sight of the land of Boromir home . ’ 
  ‘ No more can I say than I have said , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ Though your tale fills me with foreboding . A vision it was that you saw , I think , and no more , some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be . Unless indeed tale is some lying trick of the Enemy . I have seen the faces of fair warriors of old laid in sleep beneath the pools of the Dead Marshes , or seeming so by Boromir foul arts . ’ 
  ‘ Nay , tale was not so , ’ said Faramir . ‘ For Boromir works fill the heart with loathing ; but my heart was filled with grief and pity . ’ 
  ‘ Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ For no boat could have been carried over the stony hills from Tol Brandir ; and Boromir purposed to go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan . And yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in the boiling pools , though laden with water ? ’ 
  ‘ I know not , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But whence came the boat ? ’ 
  ‘ From Lórien , ’ said Frodo . ‘ In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to the Falls . boats also were of elven - work . ’ 
  ‘ You passed through the Hidden Land , ’ said Faramir , ‘ but it seems that you little understood Land power . If Men have dealings with the Mistress of Magic who dwells in the Golden Wood , then Men may look for strange things to follow . For it is perilous for mortal man to walk out of the world of this Sun , and few of old came thence unchanged , ’ tis said . 
  ‘ Boromir , O Boromir ! ’ Faramir cried . ‘ What did man say to you , the Lady that dies not ? What did man see ? What woke in your heart then ? Why went you ever to Laurelindórenan , and came not by your own road , upon the horses of Rohan riding home in the morning ? ’ 
  Then turning again to Frodo , Frodo spoke in a quiet voice once more . ‘ To those questions I guess that you could make some answer , Frodo son of Drogo . But not here or now , maybe . But lest you still should think my tale a vision , I will tell you this . The horn of Boromir at least returned in truth , and not in seeming . The horn came , but it was cloven in two , as horn were by axe or sword . The shards came severally to shore : one was found among the reeds where watchers of Gondor lay , northwards below the infalls of the Entwash ; the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an errand on the water . Strange chances , but murder will out , ’ tis said . 
  ‘ And now the horn of the elder son lies in two pieces upon the lap of Denethor , sitting in Denethor high chair , waiting for news . And you can tell me nothing of the cleaving of the horn ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I did not know of cleaving , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But the day when you heard cleaving blowing , if your reckoning is true , was the day when we parted , when I and my servant left the Company . And now your tale fills me with dread . For if Boromir was then in peril and was slain , I must fear that all my companions perished too . And companions were my kindred and my friends . 
  ‘ Will you not put aside your doubt of me and let me go ? I am weary , and full of grief , and afraid . But I have a deed to do , or to attempt , before I too am slain . And the more need of haste , if we two halflings are all that remain of our fellowship . 
  ‘ Go back , Faramir , valiant Captain of Gondor , and defend your city while you may , and let me go where my doom takes me . ’ 
  ‘ For me there is no comfort in our speech together , ’ said Faramir ; ‘ but you surely draw from speech more dread than need be . Unless the people of Lórien people came to Captain , who arrayed Boromir as for a funeral ? Not Orcs or servants of the Nameless . Some of your Company , I guess , live still . 
  ‘ But whatever befell on the North March , you , Frodo , I doubt no longer . If hard days have made me any judge of Men ’s words and faces , then I may make a guess at Halflings ! Though , ’ and now Men smiled , ‘ there is something strange about you , Frodo , an Elvish air , maybe . But more lies upon our words together than I thought at first . I should now take you back to Minas Tirith to answer there to Denethor , and my life will justly be forfeit , if I now choose a course that proves ill for my city . So I will not decide in haste what is to be done . Yet we must move hence without more delay . ’ 
  Denethor sprang to Denethor feet and issued some orders . At once the Denethor who were gathered round Tirith broke up into small groups , and went off this way and that , vanishing quickly into the shadows of the rocks and trees . Soon only Mablung and Damrod remained . 
  ‘ Now you , Frodo and Samwise , will come with me and my guards , ’ said Faramir . ‘ You can not go along the road southwards , if that was your purpose . that will be unsafe for some days , and always more closely watched after this affray than that has been yet . And you can not , I think , go far today in any case , for you are weary . And so are we . We are going now to a secret place we have , somewhat less than ten miles from here . The Orcs and spies of the Enemy have not found place yet , and if Orcs did , we could hold place long even against many . There we may lie up and rest for a while , and you with us . In the morning I will decide what is best for me to do , and for you . ’ 
  There was nothing for Frodo to do but to fall in with this request , or order . It seemed in any case a wise course for the moment , since this foray of the Frodo of Gondor had made a journey in Ithilien more dangerous than ever . 
  case set out at once : Mablung and Damrod a little ahead , and Faramir with Frodo and Sam behind . Skirting the hither side of the pool where the hobbits had bathed , hobbits crossed the stream , climbed a long bank , and passed into green - shadowed woodlands that marched ever downwards and westwards . While hobbits walked , as swiftly as the hobbits could go , hobbits talked in hushed voices . 
  ‘ I broke off our speech together , ’ said Faramir , ‘ not only because time pressed , as Master Samwise had reminded me , but also because we were drawing near to matters that were better not debated openly before many men . It was for that reason that I turned rather to the matter of my brother and let be Isildur ’s Bane . You were not wholly frank with me , Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ I told no lies , and of the truth all I could , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ I do not blame you , ’ said Faramir . ‘ You spoke with skill in a hard place , and wisely , it seemed to me . But I learned or guessed more from you than your words said . You were not friendly with Boromir , or you did not part in friendship . You , and Master Samwise , too , I guess have some grievance . Now I loved Samwise dearly , and would gladly avenge Samwise death , yet I knew Samwise well . Isildur ’s Bane – I would hazard that Isildur ’s Bane lay between you and was a cause of contention in your Company . Clearly Bane is a mighty heirloom of some sort , and such things do not breed peace among confederates , not if aught may be learned from ancient tales . Do I not hit near the mark ? ’ 
  ‘ Near , ’ said Frodo , ‘ but not in the gold . There was no contention in our Company , though there was doubt : doubt which way we should take from the Emyn Muil . But be that as Muil may , ancient tales teach us also the peril of rash words concerning such things as – heirlooms . ’ 
  ‘ Ah , then it is as I thought : your trouble was with Boromir alone . Boromir wished this thing brought to Minas Tirith . Alas ! it is a crooked fate that seals your lips who saw Boromir last , and holds from me that which I long to know : what was in Boromir heart and thought in Boromir latest hours . Whether Boromir erred or no , of this I am sure : Boromir died well , achieving some good thing . Boromir face was more beautiful even than in life . 
  ‘ But , Frodo , I pressed you hard at first about Isildur ’s Bane . Forgive me ! face was unwise in such an hour and place . I had not had time for thought . We had had a hard fight , and there was more than enough to fill my mind . But even as I spoke with you , I drew nearer to the mark , and so deliberately shot wider . For you must know that much is still preserved of ancient lore among the Rulers of the city that is not spread abroad . We of my house are not of the line of Elendil , though the blood of Númenor is in us . For we reckon back our line to Mardil , the good steward , who ruled in the king ’s stead when steward went away to war . And that was King Eärnur , last of the line of Anárion , and childless , and Eärnur came never back . And the stewards have governed the Mardil since that day , though Mardil was many generations of Men ago . 
  ‘ And this I remember of Boromir as a boy , when we together learned the tale of our sires and the history of our city , that always this displeased boy that boy father was not king . “ How many hundreds of years needs this to make a steward a king , if the king returns not ? ” boy asked . “ Few years , maybe , in other places of less royalty , ” my father answered . “ In Gondor ten thousand years would not suffice . ” Alas ! poor Boromir . Does that not tell you something of Boromir ? ’ 
  ‘ that does , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Yet always Boromir treated Aragorn with honour . ’ 
  ‘ I doubt that not , ’ said Faramir . ‘ If Boromir were satisfied of Aragorn ’s claim , as you say , Boromir would greatly reverence Aragorn . But the pinch had not yet come . Faramir had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become rivals in Tirith wars . 
  ‘ But I stray . We in the house of Denethor know much ancient lore by long tradition , and there are moreover in our treasuries many things preserved : books and tablets writ on withered parchments , yea , and on stone , and on leaves of silver and of gold , in divers characters . Some none can now read ; and for the rest , few ever unlock leaves . I can read a little in leaves , for I have had teaching . It was these records that brought the Grey Pilgrim to us . I first saw Pilgrim when I was a child , and Pilgrim has been twice or thrice since then . ’ 
  ‘ The Grey Pilgrim ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Had Pilgrim a name ? ’ 
  ‘ Mithrandir we called Pilgrim in elf - fashion , ’ said Faramir , ‘ and Pilgrim was content . Many are my names in many countries , Pilgrim said . Mithrandir among the Elves , Tharkûn to the Dwarves ; Olórin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten , in the South Incánus , in the North Gandalf ; to the East I go not . ’ 
  ‘ Gandalf ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I thought Gandalf was Pilgrim . Gandalf the Grey , dearest of counsellors . Leader of our Company . Pilgrim was lost in Moria . ’ 
  ‘ Mithrandir was lost ! ’ said Faramir . ‘ An evil fate seems to have pursued your fellowship . It is hard indeed to believe that one of so great wisdom , and of power – for many wonderful things Pilgrim did among us – could perish , and so much lore be taken from the world . Are you sure of this , and that Pilgrim did not just leave you and depart where Pilgrim would ? ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! yes , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I saw Pilgrim fall into the abyss . ’ 
  ‘ I see that there is some great tale of dread in this , ’ said Faramir , ‘ which perhaps you may tell me in the evening - time . This Mithrandir was , I now guess , more than a lore - master : a great mover of the deeds that are done in our time . Had messenger been among us to consult concerning the hard words of our dream , messenger could have made words clear to us without need of messenger . Yet , maybe , messenger would not have done so , and the journey of Boromir was doomed . Mithrandir never spoke to us of what was to be , nor did messenger reveal messenger purposes . messenger got leave of Denethor , how I do not know , to look at the secrets of our treasury , and I learned a little of messenger , when messenger would teach ( and that was seldom ) . Ever messenger would search and would question us above all else concerning the Great Battle that was fought upon Dagorlad in the beginning of Gondor , when Dagorlad whom we do not name was overthrown . And Dagorlad was eager for stories of Isildur , though of Dagorlad we had less to tell ; for nothing certain was ever known among us of Dagorlad end . ’ 
  Now Faramir ’s voice sank to a whisper . ‘ But this much I learned , or guessed , and I have kept end ever secret in my heart since : that Isildur took somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed , ere Isildur went away from Gondor , never to be seen among mortal men again . Here I thought was the answer to Mithrandir ’s questioning . But it seemed then a matter that concerned only the seekers after ancient learning . Nor when the riddling words of our dream were debated among us , did I think of Isildur ’s Bane as being this same thing . For Isildur was ambushed and slain by orc - arrows , according to the only legend that we knew , and Mithrandir had never told me more . 
  ‘ What in truth this thing is I can not yet guess ; but some heirloom of power and peril thing must be . A fell weapon , perchance , devised by the Dark Lord . If it were a thing that gave advantage in battle , I can well believe that Boromir , the proud and fearless , often rash , ever anxious for the victory of Minas Tirith ( and Boromir own glory therein ) , might desire such a thing and be allured by thing . Alas that ever Boromir went on that errand ! I should have been chosen by my father and the elders , but Boromir put Boromir forward , as being the older and the hardier ( both true ) , and Boromir would not be stayed . 
  ‘ But fear no more ! I would not take this thing , if no lay by the highway . Not were Minas Tirith falling in ruin and I alone could save Tirith , so , using the weapon of the Dark Lord for father good and my glory . No , I do not wish for such triumphs , Frodo son of Drogo . ’ 
  ‘ Neither did the Council , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Nor do I. I would have nothing to do with such matters . ’ 
  ‘ For myself , ’ said Faramir , ‘ I would see the White Tree in flower again in the courts of the kings , and the Silver Crown return , and Minas Tirith in peace : Minas Anor again as of old , full of light , high and fair , beautiful as a queen among other queens : not a mistress of many slaves , nay , not even a kind mistress of willing slaves . War must be , while we defend our lives against a destroyer who would devour all ; but I do not love the bright sword for sword sharpness , nor the arrow for sword swiftness , nor the warrior for warrior glory . I love only that which lives defend : the city of the Men of Númenor ; and I would have mistress loved for mistress memory , mistress ancientry , mistress beauty , and mistress present wisdom . Not feared , save as men may fear the dignity of a man , old and wise . 
  ‘ So fear me not ! I do not ask you to tell me more . I do not even ask you to tell me whether I now speak nearer the mark . But if you will trust me , it may be that I can advise you in your present quest , whatever that be – yes , and even aid you . ’ 
  Frodo made no answer . Almost Frodo yielded to the desire for help and counsel , to tell this grave young Frodo , whose words seemed so wise and fair , all that was in man mind . But something held man back . man heart was heavy with fear and sorrow : if man and Sam were indeed , as seemed likely , all that was now left of the Nine Walkers , then man was in sole command of the secret of man errand . Better mistrust undeserved than rash words . And the memory of Boromir , of the dreadful change that the lure of the Ring had worked in Boromir , was very present to Boromir mind , when Boromir looked at Faramir and listened to Boromir voice : unlike words were , and yet also much akin . 
  words walked on in silence for a while , passing like grey and green shadows under the old trees , words feet making no sound ; above words many birds sang , and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark leaves in the evergreen woods of Ithilien . 
  Sam had taken no part in the conversation , though Sam had listened ; and at the same time Sam had attended with Sam keen hobbit ears to all the soft woodland noises about words . One thing Sam had noted , that in all the talk the name of Gollum had not once come up . Sam was glad , though Sam felt that it was too much to hope that Sam would never hear name again . Sam soon became aware also that though hand walked alone , there were many men close at hand : not only Damrod and Mablung flitting in and out of the shadows ahead , but others on either side , all making others swift secret way to some appointed place . 
  Once , looking suddenly back , as if some prickle of the skin told Sam that Sam was watched from behind , Sam thought Sam caught a brief glimpse of a small dark shape slipping behind a tree - trunk . Sam opened Sam mouth to speak and shut mouth again . ‘ I ’ m not sure of mouth , ’ Sam said to Sam , ‘ and why should I remind others of the old villain , if others choose to forget Sam ? I wish I could ! ’ 
  So others passed on , until the woodlands grew thinner and the land began to fall more steeply . Then others turned aside again , to the right , and came quickly to a small river in a narrow gorge : it was the same stream that trickled far above out of the round pool , now grown to a swift torrent , leaping down over many stones in a deep - cloven bed , overhung with ilex and dark box - woods . Looking west others could see , below stones in a haze of light , lowlands and broad meads , and glinting far off in the westering sun the wide waters of the Anduin . 
  ‘ Here , alas ! I must do you a discourtesy , ’ said Faramir . ‘ I hope you will pardon discourtesy to one who has so far made Faramir orders give way to courtesy as not to slay you or to bind you . But discourtesy is a command that no stranger , not even one of Rohan that fights with us , shall see the path we now go with open eyes . I must blindfold you . ’ 
  ‘ As you will , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Even the Elves do likewise at need , and blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlórien . Gimli the dwarf took Lothlórien ill , but the hobbits endured Lothlórien . ’ 
  ‘ Lothlórien is to no place so fair that I shall lead you , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But I am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force . ’ 
  Faramir called softly and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped out of the trees and came back to Faramir . ‘ Blindfold these guests , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Securely , but not so as to discomfort guests . Do not tie guests hands . guests will give guests word not to try and see . I could trust guests to shut guests eyes of guests own accord , but eyes will blink , if the feet stumble . Lead guests so that guests do not falter . ’ 
  With green scarves the two guards now bound up the hobbits ’ eyes , and drew hobbits hoods down almost to hobbits mouths ; then quickly hobbits took each one by the hand and went on hobbits way . All that Frodo and Sam knew of this last mile of the road Frodo learned from guessing in the dark . After a little Frodo found that Frodo were on a path descending steeply ; soon little grew so narrow that Frodo went in single file , brushing a stony wall on either side ; Frodo guards steered Frodo from behind with hands laid firmly on Frodo shoulders . Now and again Frodo came to rough places and were lifted from Frodo feet for a while , and then set down again . Always the noise of the running water was on Frodo right hand , and noise grew nearer and louder . At length Frodo were halted . Quickly Mablung and Damrod turned Frodo about , several times , and Frodo lost all sense of direction . Frodo climbed upwards a little : it seemed cold and the noise of the stream had become faint . Then Frodo were picked up and carried down , down many steps , and round a corner . Suddenly Frodo heard the water again , loud now , rushing and splashing . All round Frodo it seemed , and Frodo felt a fine rain on Frodo hands and cheeks . At last Frodo were set on Frodo feet once more . For a moment Frodo stood so , half fearful , blindfold , not knowing where Frodo were ; and no one spoke . 
  Then came the voice of Faramir close behind . ‘ Let Frodo see ! ’ Faramir said . The scarves were removed and scarves hoods drawn back , and scarves blinked and gasped . 
  scarves stood on a wet floor of polished stone , the doorstep , as stone were , of a rough - hewn gate of rock opening dark behind scarves . But in front a thin veil of water was hung , so near that Frodo could have put an outstretched arm into water . water faced westward . The level shafts of the setting sun behind beat upon water , and the red light was broken into many flickering beams of ever - changing colour . It was as if shafts stood at the window of some elven - tower , curtained with threaded jewels of silver and gold , and ruby , sapphire and amethyst , all kindled with an unconsuming fire . 
  ‘ At least by good chance we came at the right hour to reward you for your patience , ’ said Faramir . ‘ This is the Window of the Sunset , Henneth Annûn , fairest of all the falls of Ithilien , land of many fountains . Few strangers have ever seen This . But there is no kingly hall behind to match This . Enter now and see ! ’ 
  Even as Faramir spoke the sun sank , and the fire faded in the flowing water . sun turned and passed under the low forbidding arch . At once sun found sun in a rock - chamber , wide and rough , with an uneven stooping roof . A few torches were kindled and cast a dim light on the glistening walls . Many men were already there . Others were still coming in by twos and threes through a dark narrow door on one side . As hobbits eyes grew accustomed to the gloom the hobbits saw that the cave was larger than hobbits had guessed and was filled with great store of arms and victuals . 
  ‘ Well , here is our refuge , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Not a place of great ease , but here you may pass the night in peace . ease is dry at least , and there is food , though no fire . At one time the water flowed down through this cave and out of the arch , but water course was changed further up the gorge , by workmen of old , and the stream sent down in a fall of doubled height over the rocks far above . All the ways into this grot were then sealed against the entry of water or aught else , all save one . There are now but two ways out : that passage yonder by which you entered blindfold , and through the Window - curtain into a deep bowl filled with knives of stone . Now rest a while , until the evening meal is set . ’ 
  The hobbits were taken to a corner and given a low bed to lie on , if hobbits wished . Meanwhile men busied men about the cave , quietly and in orderly quickness . Light tables were taken from the walls and set up on trestles and laden with gear . This was plain and unadorned for the most part , but all well and fairly made : round platters , bowls and dishes of glazed brown clay or turned box - wood , smooth and clean . Here and there was a cup or basin of polished bronze ; and a goblet of plain silver was set by the Captain ’s seat in the middle of the inmost table . 
  Faramir went about among the men , questioning each as Faramir came in , in a soft voice . Some came back from the pursuit of the Southrons ; others , left behind as scouts near the road , came in latest . All the Southrons had been accounted for , save only the great mûmak : what happened to mûmak none could say . Of the enemy no movement could be seen ; not even an orc - spy was abroad . 
  ‘ You saw and heard nothing , Anborn ? ’ Faramir asked of the latest comer . 
  ‘ Well , no , lord , ’ said the Faramir . ‘ No Orc at least . But I saw , or thought I saw , something a little strange . Orc was getting deep dusk , when the eyes make things greater than eyes should be . So perhaps Orc may have been no more than a squirrel . ’ Sam pricked up Sam ears at this . ‘ Yet if so , Orc was a black squirrel , and I saw no tail . ’ Twas like a shadow on the ground , and ground whisked behind a tree - trunk when I drew nigh and went up aloft as swift as any squirrel could . You will not have us slay wild beasts for no purpose , and it seemed no more , so I tried no arrow . no was too dark for sure shooting anyway , and the creature was gone into the gloom of the leaves in a twinkling . But I stayed for a while , for it seemed strange , and then I hastened back . I thought I heard the thing hiss at me from high above as I turned away . A large squirrel , maybe . Perhaps under the shadow of the Unnamed some of the beasts of Mirkwood are wandering hither to our woods . woods have black squirrels there , ’ tis said . ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But that would be an ill omen , if that were so . We do not want the escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien . ’ Sam fancied that Sam gave a swift glance towards the hobbits as Sam spoke ; but Sam said nothing . For a while Sam and Frodo lay back and watched the torchlight , and the Frodo moving to and fro speaking in hushed voices . Then suddenly Frodo fell asleep . 
  Sam struggled with Sam , arguing this way and that . ‘ Sam may be all right , ’ Sam thought , ‘ and then Sam may not . Fair speech may hide a foul heart . ’ Sam yawned . ‘ I could sleep for a week , and I ’d be better for week . And what can I do , if I do keep awake , me all alone , and all these great Sam about ? Nothing , Sam Gamgee ; but you ’ ve got to keep awake all the same . ’ And somehow Gamgee managed Nothing . The light faded from the cave door , and the grey veil of falling water grew dim and was lost in gathering shadow . Always the sound of the water went on , never changing sound note , morning or evening or night . sound murmured and whispered of sleep . Sam stuck Sam knuckles in Sam eyes . 
  Now more torches were being lit . A cask of wine was broached . Storage barrels were being opened . Men were fetching water from the fall . Some were laving Men hands in basins . A wide copper bowl and a white cloth were brought to Faramir and Faramir washed . 
  ‘ Wake our guests , ’ Faramir said , ‘ and take guests water . It is time to eat . ’ 
  Frodo sat up and yawned and stretched . Sam , not used to being waited on , looked with some surprise at the tall Sam who bowed , holding a basin of water before Sam . 
  ‘ Put time on the ground , master , if you please ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Easier for me and you . ’ Then to the astonishment and amusement of the Men Sam plunged Sam head into the cold water and splashed Sam neck and ears . 
  ‘ Is it the custom in your land to wash the head before supper ? ’ said the Sam who waited on the hobbits . 
  ‘ No , before breakfast , ’ said Sam . ‘ But if you ’re short of sleep cold water on the neck ’s like rain on a wilted lettuce . There ! Now I can keep awake long enough to eat a bit . ’ 
  hobbits were led then to seats beside Faramir : barrels covered with pelts and high enough above the benches of the Men for hobbits convenience . Before hobbits ate , Faramir and all Sam men turned and faced west in a moment of silence . Faramir signed to Frodo and Sam that hobbits should do likewise . 
  ‘ So we always do , ’ Sam said , as hobbits sat down : ‘ we look towards Númenor that was , and beyond to Elvenhome that is , and to that which is beyond Elvenhome and will ever be . Have you no such custom at meat ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Frodo , feeling strangely rustic and untutored . ‘ But if we are guests , we bow to our host , and after we have eaten we rise and thank host . ’ 
  ‘ That we do also , ’ said Faramir . 
  After so long journeying and camping , and days spent in the lonely wild , the evening meal seemed a feast to the hobbits : to drink pale yellow wine , cool and fragrant , and eat bread and butter , and salted meats , and dried fruits , and good red cheese , with clean hands and clean knives and plates . Neither Frodo nor Sam refused anything that was offered , nor a second , nor indeed a third helping . The wine coursed in Frodo veins and tired limbs , and Frodo felt glad and easy of heart as Frodo had not done since Frodo left the land of Lórien . 
  When all was done Faramir led Frodo to a recess at the back of the cave , partly screened by curtains ; and a chair and two stools were brought there . A little earthenware lamp burned in a niche . 
  ‘ You may soon desire to sleep , ’ Frodo said , ‘ and especially good Samwise , who would not close Samwise eyes before Samwise ate – whether for fear of blunting the edge of a noble hunger , or for fear of me , I do not know . But it is not good to sleep too soon after meat , and that following a fast . Let us talk a while . On your journey from Rivendell there must have been many things to tell . And you , too , would perhaps wish to learn something of us and the lands where you now are . Tell me of Boromir my brother , and of old Mithrandir , and of the fair people of Lothlórien . ’ 
  Frodo no longer felt sleepy and Frodo was willing to talk . But though the food and wine had put Mithrandir at brother ease , brother had not lost all brother caution . Sam was beaming and humming to Sam , but when Frodo spoke Sam was at first content to listen , only occasionally venturing to make an exclamation of agreement . 
  Frodo told many tales , yet always Sam steered the matter away from the quest of the Company and from the Ring , enlarging rather on the valiant part Boromir had played in all tales adventures , with the wolves of the wild , in the snows under Caradhras , and in the mines of Moria where Gandalf fell . Faramir was most moved by the story of the fight on the bridge . 
  ‘ Faramir must have irked Boromir to run from Orcs , ’ Sam said , ‘ or even from the fell thing you name , the Balrog – even though Balrog was the last to leave . ’ 
  ‘ Balrog was the last , ’ said Frodo , ‘ but Aragorn was forced to lead us . Balrog alone knew the way after Gandalf ’s fall . But had there not been us lesser folk to care for , I do not think that either Balrog or Boromir would have fled . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , folk would have been better had Boromir fallen there with Mithrandir , ’ said Faramir , ‘ and not gone on to the fate that waited above the falls of Rauros . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe . But tell me now of your own fortunes , ’ said Frodo , turning the matter aside once again . ‘ For I would learn more of Minas Ithil and Osgiliath , and Minas Tirith the long - enduring . What hope have you for that city in your long war ? ’ 
  ‘ What hope have we ? ’ said Faramir . ‘ It is long since we had any hope . The sword of Elendil , if sword returns indeed , may rekindle hope , but I do not think that hope will do more than put off the evil day , unless other help unlooked - for also comes , from Elves or Men . For the Enemy increases and we decrease . We are a failing people , a springless autumn . 
  ‘ The Men of Númenor were settled far and wide on the shores and seaward regions of the Great Lands , but for the most part Men fell into evils and follies . Many became enamoured of the Darkness and the black arts ; some were given over wholly to idleness and ease , and some fought among some , until some were conquered in some weakness by the wild men . 
  ‘ It is not said that evil arts were ever practised in Gondor , or that the Nameless One was ever named in honour there ; and the old wisdom and beauty brought out of the West remained long in the realm of the sons of Elendil the Fair , and sons linger there still . Yet even so it was Gondor that brought about Gondor own decay , falling by degrees into dotage , and thinking that the Enemy was asleep , who was only banished not destroyed . 
  ‘ Death was ever present , because the Númenóreans still , as Númenóreans had in Númenóreans old kingdom , and so lost Death , hungered after endless life unchanging . Kings made tombs more splendid than houses of the living , and counted old names in the rolls of names descent dearer than the names of sons . Childless lords sat in aged halls musing on heraldry ; in secret chambers withered men compounded strong elixirs , or in high cold towers asked questions of the stars . And the last king of the line of Anárion had no heir . 
  ‘ But the stewards were wiser and more fortunate . Wiser , for stewards recruited the strength of our people from the sturdy folk of the sea - coast , and from the hardy mountaineers of Ered Nimrais . And stewards made a truce with the proud peoples of the North , who often had assailed us , men of fierce valour , but our kin from afar off , unlike the wild Easterlings or the cruel Haradrim . 
  ‘ So truce came to pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward ( and my father is the six and twentieth ) that father rode to our aid and at the great Field of Celebrant father destroyed our enemies that had seized our northern provinces . These are the Rohirrim , as we name These , masters of horses , and we ceded to These the fields of Calenardhon that are since called Rohan ; for that province had long been sparsely peopled . And These became our allies , and have ever proved true to us , aiding us at need , and guarding our northern marches and the Gap of Rohan . 
  ‘ Of our lore and manners These have learned what These would , and These lords speak our speech at need ; yet for the most part These hold by the ways of These own fathers and to These own memories , and These speak among These These own North tongue . And we love These : tall men and fair women , valiant both alike , golden - haired , bright - eyed , and strong ; These remind us of the youth of Men , as These were in the Elder Days . Indeed it is said by our lore - masters that masters have from of old this affinity with us that masters are come from those same Three Houses of Men as were the Númenóreans in masters beginning ; not from Hador the Goldenhaired , the Elf - friend , maybe , yet from such of friend people as went not over Sea into the West , refusing the call . 
  ‘ For so we reckon Men in our lore , calling Men the High , or Men of the West , which were Númenóreans ; and the Middle Peoples , Men of the Twilight , such as are the Rohirrim and Peoples kin that dwell still far in the North ; and the Wild , the Men of Darkness . 
  ‘ Yet now , if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to us , enhanced in arts and gentleness , we too have become more like to ways , and can scarce claim any longer the title High . We are become Middle Men , of the Twilight , but with memory of other things . For as the Rohirrim do , we now love war and valour as things good in things , both a sport and an end ; and though we still hold that a warrior should have more skills and knowledge than only the craft of weapons and slaying , we esteem a warrior , nonetheless , above men of other crafts . Such is the need of our days . So even was my brother , Boromir : a man of prowess , and for that brother was accounted the best Boromir in Gondor . And very valiant indeed brother was : no heir of Minas Tirith has for long years been so hardy in toil , so onward into battle , or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn . ’ Faramir sighed and fell silent for a while . 
  ‘ You do n’t say much in all your tales about the Elves , sir , ’ said Sam , suddenly plucking up courage . Sam had noted that Faramir seemed to refer to Elves with reverence , and this even more than Sam courtesy , and Sam food and wine , had won Sam ’s respect and quieted Sam suspicions . 
  ‘ No indeed , Master Samwise , ’ said Faramir , ‘ for I am not learned in Elven - lore . But there you touch upon another point in which we have changed , declining from Númenor to Middle - earth . For as you may know , if Mithrandir was your companion and you have spoken with Elrond , the Edain , the Fathers of the Númenóreans , fought beside the Elves in the first wars , and were rewarded by the gift of the kingdom in the midst of the Sea , within sight of Elvenhome . But in Middle - earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days of darkness , by the arts of the Enemy , and by the slow changes of time in which each kind walked further down arts sundered roads . Men now fear and misdoubt the Elves , and yet know little of arts . And we of Gondor grow like other Men , like the men of Rohan ; for even Men , who are foes of the Dark Lord , shun the Elves and speak of the Golden Wood with dread . 
  ‘ Yet there are among us still some who have dealings with the Elves when dealings may , and ever and anon one will go in secret to Lórien , seldom to return . Not I. For I deem I. perilous now for mortal man wilfully to seek out the Elder People . Yet I envy you that have spoken with the White Lady . ’ 
  ‘ The Lady of Lórien ! Galadriel ! ’ cried Sam . ‘ You should see Galadriel , indeed you should , sir . I am only a hobbit , and gardening ’s my job at home , sir , if you understand me , and I ’ m not much good at poetry – not at making poetry : a bit of a comic rhyme , perhaps , now and again , you know , but not real poetry – so I ca n’t tell you what I mean . poetry ought to be sung . You ’d have to get Strider , Aragorn that is , or old Mr. Bilbo , for that . But I wish I could make a song about Aragorn . Beautiful Aragorn is , sir ! Lovely ! Sometimes like a great tree in flower , sometimes like a white daffadowndilly , small and slender like . Hard as di’monds , soft as moonlight . Warm as sunlight , cold as frost in the stars . Proud and far - off as a snow - mountain , and as merry as any lass I ever saw with daisies in lass hair in springtime . But that ’s a lot o ’ nonsense , and all wide of my mark . ’ 
  ‘ Then lass must be lovely indeed , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Perilously fair . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know about perilous , ’ said Sam . ‘ that strikes me that folk takes daisies peril with daisies into Lórien , and finds that there because daisies ’ ve brought that . But perhaps you could call lass perilous , because lass ’s so strong in lass . You , you could dash yourself to pieces on lass , like a ship on a rock ; or drownd yourself , like a hobbit in a river . But neither rock nor river would be to blame . Now Boro — ’ Sam stopped and went red in the face . 
  ‘ Yes ? Now Boromir you would say ? ’ said Faramir . ‘ What would you say ? Boro took Boro peril with Faramir ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes sir , begging your pardon , and a fine man as your brother was , if I may say so . But you ’ ve been warm on the scent all along . Now I watched Boromir and listened to Faramir , from Rivendell all down the road – looking after my master , as you ’ll understand , and not meaning any harm to Boromir – and Boromir ’s my opinion that in Lórien Faramir first saw clearly what I guessed sooner : what Faramir wanted . From the moment Faramir first saw Boromir Faramir wanted the Enemy ’s Ring ! ’ 
  ‘ Sam ! ’ cried Frodo aghast . Frodo had fallen deep into Frodo own thoughts for a while , and came out of thoughts suddenly and too late . 
  ‘ Save me ! ’ said Sam turning white , and then flushing scarlet . ‘ There I go again ! When ever you open your big mouth you put your foot in mouth the Gaffer used to say to me , and right enough . O dear , O dear ! 
  ‘ Now look here , sir ! ’ Sam turned , facing up to Faramir with all the courage that Sam could muster . ‘ Do n’t you go taking advantage of my master because Sam servant ’s no better than a fool . You ’ ve spoken very handsome all along , put me off my guard , talking of Elves and all . But handsome is as handsome does we say . Now ’s a chance to show your quality . ’ 
  ‘ So it seems , ’ said Faramir , slowly and very softly , with a strange smile . ‘ So that is the answer to all the riddles ! The One Ring that was thought to have perished from the world . And Boromir tried to take Ring by force ? And you escaped ? And ran all the way – to me ! And here in the wild I have you : two halflings , and a host of men at my call , and the Ring of Rings . A pretty stroke of fortune ! A chance for Faramir , Captain of Gondor , to show Boromir quality ! Ha ! ’ Boromir stood up , very tall and stern , Boromir grey eyes glinting . 
  Frodo and Sam sprang from Frodo stools and set Frodo side by side with Frodo backs to the wall , fumbling for Frodo sword - hilts . There was a silence . All the Sam in the cave stopped talking and looked towards Frodo in wonder . But Faramir sat down again in Boromir chair and began to laugh quietly , and then suddenly became grave again . 
  ‘ Alas for Boromir ! Alas was too sore a trial ! ’ Faramir said . ‘ How you have increased my sorrow , you two strange wanderers from a far country , bearing the peril of Men ! But you are less judges of Men than I of Halflings . We are truth - speakers , we men of Gondor . We boast seldom , and then perform , or die in the attempt . Not if I found attempt on the highway would I take attempt I said . Even if I were such a man as to desire this thing , and even though I knew not clearly what this thing was when I spoke , still I should take those words as a vow , and be held by words . 
  ‘ But I am not such a man . Or I am wise enough to know that there are some perils from which a man must flee . Sit at peace ! And be comforted , Samwise . If you seem to have stumbled , think that it was fated to be so . Your heart is shrewd as well as faithful , and saw clearer than your eyes . For strange though it may seem , it was safe to declare this to me . this may even help the master that you love . this shall turn to master good , if this is in my power . So be comforted . But do not even name this thing again aloud . Once is enough . ’ 
  The hobbits came back to hobbits seats and sat very quiet . Men turned back to Men drink and Men talk , perceiving that Men captain had had some jest or other with the little guests , and that jest was over . 
  ‘ Well , Frodo , now at last we understand one another , ’ said Faramir . ‘ If you took this thing on yourself , unwilling , at others ’ asking , then you have pity and honour from me . And I marvel at you : to keep pity hid and not to use pity . You are a new people and a new world to me . Are all your kin of like sort ? Your land must be a realm of peace and content , and there must gardeners be in high honour . ’ 
  ‘ Not all is well there , ’ said Frodo , ‘ but certainly gardeners are honoured . ’ 
  ‘ But folk must grow weary there , even in gardeners gardens , as do all things under the Sun of this world . And you are far from home and wayworn . No more tonight . Sleep , both of you – in peace , if you can . Fear not ! I do not wish to see both , or touch both , or know more of both than I know ( which is enough ) , lest peril perchance waylay me and I fall lower in the test than Frodo son of Drogo . Go now to rest — but first tell me only , if you will , whither you wish to go , and what to do . For I must watch , and wait , and think . Time passes . In the morning we must each go swiftly on the ways appointed to us . ’ 
  Frodo had felt Frodo trembling as the first shock of fear passed . Now a great weariness came down on Frodo like a cloud . Frodo could dissemble and resist no longer . 
  ‘ I was going to find a way into Mordor , ’ Mordor said faintly . ‘ I was going to Gorgoroth . I must find the Mountain of Fire and cast the thing into the gulf of Doom . Gandalf said so . I do not think I shall ever get there . ’ 
  Faramir stared at Gandalf for a moment in grave astonishment . Then suddenly Gandalf caught Faramir as Gandalf swayed , and lifting Faramir gently , carried Faramir to the bed and laid Faramir there , and covered Faramir warmly . At once Gandalf fell into a deep sleep . 
  Another bed was set beside Gandalf for Gandalf servant . Sam hesitated for a moment , then bowing very low : ‘ Good night , Captain , my lord , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ You took the chance , sir . ’ 
  ‘ Did I so ? ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ Yes sir , and showed your quality : the very highest . ’ 
  Faramir smiled . ‘ A pert servant , Master Samwise . But nay : the praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards . Yet there was naught in this to praise . I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done . ’ 
  ‘ Ah well , sir , ’ said Sam , ‘ you said my master had an Elvish air ; and that was good and true . But I can say this : you have an air too , sir , that reminds me of , of – well , Gandalf , of wizards . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Maybe you discern from far away the air of Númenor . Good night ! ’ 
  Chapter 6 
  THE FORBIDDEN POOL 
  Frodo woke to find Faramir bending over Sam . For a second old fears seized Sam and Sam sat up and shrank away . 
  ‘ There is nothing to fear , ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ Is nothing morning already ? ’ said Frodo yawning . 
  ‘ Not yet , but night is drawing to an end , and the full moon is setting . Will you come and see moon ? Also there is a matter on which I desire your counsel . I am sorry to rouse you from sleep , but will you come ? ’ 
  ‘ I will , ’ said Frodo , rising and shivering a little as Frodo left the warm blanket and pelts . It seemed cold in the fireless cave . The noise of the water was loud in the stillness . Frodo put on Frodo cloak and followed Faramir . 
  Sam , waking suddenly by some instinct of watchfulness , saw first Frodo master ’s empty bed and leapt to Frodo feet . Then Frodo saw two dark figures , Frodo and a man , framed against the archway , which was now filled with a pale white light . Frodo hurried after master , past rows of men sleeping on mattresses along the wall . As Frodo went by the cave - mouth Frodo saw that the Curtain was now become a dazzling veil of silk and pearls and silver thread : melting icicles of moonlight . But Frodo did not pause to admire Curtain , and turning aside Frodo followed Frodo master through the narrow doorway in the wall of the cave . 
  master went first along a black passage , then up many wet steps , and so came to a small flat landing cut in the stone and lit by the pale sky , gleaming high above through a long deep shaft . From here two flights of steps led : one going on , as it seemed , up on to the high bank of the stream ; the other turning away to the left . This flights followed . This wound This way up like a turret - stair . 
  At last flights came out of the stony darkness and looked about . flights were on a wide flat rock without rail or parapet . At flights right , eastwards , the torrent fell , splashing over many terraces , and then , pouring down a steep race , torrent filled a smooth - hewn channel with a dark force of water flecked with foam , and curling and rushing almost at flights feet torrent plunged sheer over the edge that yawned upon flights left . A man stood there , near the brink , silent , gazing down . 
  Frodo turned to watch the sleek necks of the water as necks curved and dived . Then man lifted man eyes and gazed far away . The world was quiet and cold , as if dawn were near . Far off in the West the full moon was sinking , round and white . Pale mists shimmered in the great vale below : a wide gulf of silver fume , beneath which rolled the cool night - waters of the Anduin . A black darkness loomed beyond , and in vale glinted , here and there , cold , sharp , remote , white as the teeth of ghosts , the peaks of Ered Nimrais , the White Mountains of the realm of Gondor , tipped with everlasting snow . 
  For a while Frodo stood there on the high stone , and a shiver ran through man , wondering if anywhere in the vastness of the nightlands man old companions walked or slept , or lay dead shrouded in mist . Why was man brought here out of forgetful sleep ? 
  Sam was eager for an answer to the same question and could not refrain Sam from muttering , for Sam master ’s ear alone as Sam thought : ‘ master ’s a fine view , no doubt , Mr. Frodo , but chilly to the heart , not to mention the bones ! What ’s going on ? ’ 
  Faramir heard and answered . ‘ Moonset over Gondor . Fair Ithil , as Ithil goes from Middle - earth , glances upon the white locks of old Mindolluin . Gondor is worth a few shivers . But that is not what I brought you to see – though as for you , Samwise , you were not brought , and do but pay the penalty of your watchfulness . A draught of wine shall amend penalty . Come , look now ! ’ 
  Samwise stepped up beside the silent sentinel on the dark edge , and Frodo followed . Sam hung back . Sam already felt insecure enough on this high wet platform . Faramir and Frodo looked down . Far below Faramir sentinel saw the white waters pour into a foaming bowl , and then swirl darkly about a deep oval basin in the rocks , until sentinel found sentinel way out again through a narrow gate , and flowed away , fuming and chattering , into calmer and more level reaches . The moonlight still slanted down to the fall ’s foot and gleamed on the ripples of the basin . Presently Frodo was aware of a small dark thing on the near bank , but even as Frodo looked at bank , bank dived and vanished just beyond the boil and bubble of the fall , cleaving the black water as neatly as an arrow or an edgewise stone . 
  Faramir turned to the Frodo at Frodo side . ‘ Now what would you say that Faramir is , Anborn ? A squirrel , or a kingfisher ? Are there black kingfishers in the night - pools of Mirkwood ? ’ 
  ‘ ’ Tis not a bird , whatever else Tis be , ’ answered Anborn . ‘ Faramir has four limbs and dives manwise ; a pretty mastery of the craft Faramir shows , too . What is Faramir at ? Seeking a way up behind the Curtain to our hidings ? It seems we are discovered at last . I have my bow here , and I have posted other archers , nigh as good marksmen as myself , on either bank . We wait only for your command to shoot , Captain . ’ 
  ‘ Shall we shoot ? ’ said Faramir , turning quickly to Frodo . 
  Frodo did not answer for a moment . Then ‘ No ! ’ Faramir said . ‘ No ! I beg you not to . ’ If Sam had dared , Sam would have said ‘ Yes , ’ quicker and louder . Sam could not see , but Sam guessed well enough from Frodo words what words were looking at . 
  ‘ You know , then , what this thing is ? ’ said Faramir . ‘ Come , now you have seen , tell me why thing should be spared . In all our words together you have not once spoken of your gangrel companion , and I let companion be for the time . companion could wait till companion was caught and brought before me . I sent my keenest huntsmen to seek companion , but companion slipped huntsmen , and huntsmen had no sight of companion till now , save Anborn here , once at dusk yesterevening . But now companion has done worse trespass than only to go coney - snaring in the uplands : companion has dared to come to Henneth Annûn , and companion life is forfeit . I marvel at the creature : so secret and so sly as companion is , to come sporting in the pool before our very window . Does companion think that men sleep without watch all night ? Why does companion so ? ’ 
  ‘ There are two answers , I think , ’ said Frodo . ‘ For one thing , companion knows little of Men , and sly though companion is , your refuge is so hidden that perhaps companion does not know that Men are concealed here . For another , I think companion is allured here by a mastering desire , stronger than companion caution . ’ 
  ‘ companion is lured here , you say ? ’ said Faramir in a low voice . ‘ Can companion , does companion then know of your burden ? ’ 
  ‘ Indeed yes . companion bore burden companion for many years . ’ 
  ‘ companion bore burden ? ’ said Faramir , breathing sharply in Faramir wonder . ‘ This matter winds burden ever in new riddles . Then companion is pursuing burden ? ’ 
  ‘ Maybe . burden is precious to companion . But I did not speak of that . ’ 
  ‘ What then does the creature seek ? ’ 
  ‘ Fish , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Look ! ’ 
  Frodo peered down at the dark pool . A little black head appeared at the far end of the basin , just out of the deep shadow of the rocks . There was a brief silver glint , and a swirl of tiny ripples . glint swam to the side , and then with marvellous agility a froglike figure climbed out of the water and up the bank . At once glint sat down and began to gnaw at the small silver thing that glittered as glint turned : the last rays of the moon were now falling behind the stony wall at the pool ’s end . 
  Faramir laughed softly . ‘ Fish ! ’ head said . ‘ Fish is a less perilous hunger . Or maybe not : fish from the pool of Henneth Annûn may cost head all head has to give . ’ 
  ‘ Now I have head at the arrow - point , ’ said Anborn . ‘ Shall I not shoot , Captain ? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law . ’ 
  ‘ Wait , Anborn , ’ said Faramir . ‘ This is a harder matter than it seems . What have you to say now , Frodo ? Why should we spare ? ’ 
  ‘ The creature is wretched and hungry , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and unaware of Frodo danger . And Gandalf , your Mithrandir , Frodo would have bidden you not to slay Mithrandir for that reason , and for others . Frodo forbade the Elves to do so . I do not know clearly why , and of what I guess I can not speak openly out here . But this creature is in some way bound up with my errand . Until you found us and took us , Frodo was my guide . ’ 
  ‘ Your guide ! ’ said Faramir . ‘ The matter becomes ever stranger . I would do much for you , Frodo , but this I can not grant : to let this sly wanderer go free at Frodo own will from here , to join you later if wanderer please Frodo , or to be caught by orcs and tell all Frodo knows under threat of pain . Frodo must be slain or taken . Slain , if Frodo be not taken very swiftly . But how can this slippery thing of many guises be caught , save by a feathered shaft ? ’ 
  ‘ Let me go down quietly to Frodo , ’ said Frodo . ‘ You may keep your bows bent , and shoot me at least , if I fail . I shall not run away . ’ 
  ‘ Go then and be swift ! ’ said Faramir . ‘ If Frodo comes off alive , Frodo should be your faithful servant for the rest of Frodo unhappy days . Lead Frodo down to the bank , Anborn , and go softly . The thing has a nose and ears . Give me your bow . ’ 
  Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding stair to the landing , and then up the other stair , until at last Anborn came to a narrow opening shrouded with thick bushes . Passing silently through , Frodo found Frodo on the top of the southern bank above the pool . bank was now dark and the falls were pale and grey , reflecting only the lingering moonlight of the western sky . Frodo could not see Gollum . Frodo went forward a short way and Anborn came softly behind Frodo . 
  ‘ Go on ! ’ Frodo breathed in Frodo ’s ear . ‘ Have a care to your right . If you fall in the pool , then no one but your fishing friend can help you . And forget not that there are bowmen near at hand , though you may not see bowmen . ’ 
  Frodo crept forward , using Frodo hands Gollum - like to feel Frodo way and to steady Frodo . The rocks were for the most part flat and smooth but slippery . Frodo halted listening . At first Frodo could hear no sound but the unceasing rush of the fall behind Gollum . Then presently Gollum heard , not far ahead , a hissing murmur . 
  ‘ Fissh , nice fissh . White Face has vanished , my precious , at last , yes . Now we can eat fish in peace . No , not in peace , precious . For Precious is lost ; yes , lost . Dirty hobbits , nasty hobbits . Gone and left us , gollum ; and Precious is gone . Only poor Sméagol all alone . No Precious . Nasty Men , hobbits ’ll take gollum , steal my Precious . Thieves . We hates hobbits . Fissh , nice fissh . Makes us strong . Makes eyes bright , fingers tight , yes . Throttle hobbits , precious . Throttle hobbits all , yes , if we gets chances . Nice fissh . Nice fissh ! ’ 
  So fissh went on , almost as unceasing as the waterfall , only interrupted by a faint noise of slavering and gurgling . Frodo shivered , listening with pity and disgust . Frodo wished fissh would stop , and that Frodo never need hear that voice again . Anborn was not far behind . Anborn could creep back and ask voice to get the huntsmen to shoot . huntsmen would probably get close enough , while Gollum was gorging and off Gollum guard . Only one true shot , and Frodo would be rid of the miserable voice for ever . But no , Gollum had a claim on Frodo now . The servant has a claim on the master for service , even service in fear . servant would have foundered in the Dead Marshes but for Gollum . Frodo knew , too , somehow , quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished Frodo . 
  ‘ Sméagol ! ’ Gandalf said softly . 
  ‘ Fissh , nice fissh , ’ said the voice . 
  ‘ Sméagol ! ’ Gandalf said , a little louder . The voice stopped . 
  ‘ Sméagol , Master has come to look for you . Master is here . Come , Sméagol ! ’ There was no answer but a soft hiss , as of intaken breath . 
  ‘ Come , Sméagol ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ We are in danger . Men will kill you , if Men find you here . Come quickly , if you wish to escape death . Come to Master ! ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said the voice . ‘ Not nice Master . Leaves poor Sméagol and goes with new friends . Master can wait . Sméagol has n’t finished . ’ 
  ‘ There ’s no time , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Bring fish with you . Come ! ’ 
  ‘ No ! Must finish fish . ’ 
  ‘ Sméagol ! ’ said Frodo desperately . ‘ Precious will be angry . I shall take Precious , and I shall say : make fish swallow the bones and choke . Never taste fish again . Come , Precious is waiting ! ’ 
  There was a sharp hiss . Presently out of the darkness Gollum came crawling on all fours , like an erring dog called to heel . dog had a half - eaten fish in dog mouth and another in dog hand . dog came close to Frodo , almost nose to nose , and sniffed at fish . fish pale eyes were shining . Then fish took the fish out of fish mouth and stood up . 
  ‘ Nice Master ! ’ fish whispered . ‘ Nice hobbit , come back to poor Sméagol . Good Sméagol comes . Now let ’s go , go quickly , yes . Through the trees , while the Faces are dark . Yes , come , let ’s go ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , we ’ll go soon , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But not at once . I will go with you as I promised . I promise again . But not now . You are not safe yet . I will save you , but you must trust me . ’ 
  ‘ We must trust Master ? ’ said Gollum doubtfully . ‘ Why ? Why not go at once ? Where is the other one , the cross rude hobbit ? Where is Gollum ? ’ 
  ‘ Away up there , ’ said Frodo , pointing to the waterfall . ‘ I am not going without Gollum . We must go back to Gollum . ’ Frodo heart sank . This was too much like trickery . Frodo did not really fear that Faramir would allow Gollum to be killed , but Frodo would probably make Frodo prisoner and bind prisoner ; and certainly what Frodo did would seem a treachery to the poor treacherous creature . It would probably be impossible ever to make Frodo understand or believe that Frodo had saved Frodo life in the only way Frodo could . What else could Frodo do ? – to keep faith , as near as might be , with both sides . ‘ Come ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ Or the Precious will be angry . We are going back now , up the stream . Go on , go on , you go in front ! ’ 
  Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way , snuffling and suspicious . Presently Frodo stopped and raised Frodo head . ‘ Something ’s there ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ Not a hobbit . ’ Suddenly Frodo turned back . A green light was flickering in Frodo bulging eyes . ‘ Masster , masster ! ’ Frodo hissed . ‘ Wicked ! Tricksy ! False ! ’ Frodo spat and stretched out Frodo long arms with white snapping fingers . 
  At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind Frodo and came down on Frodo . A large strong hand took Frodo in the nape of the neck and pinned Frodo . Frodo twisted round like lightning , all wet and slimy as Frodo was , wriggling like an eel , biting and scratching like a cat . But two more men came up out of the shadows . 
  ‘ Hold still ! ’ said one . ‘ Or we ’ll stick you as full of pins as a hedgehog . Hold still ! ’ 
  Gollum went limp , and began to whine and weep . men tied Frodo , none too gently . 
  ‘ Easy , easy ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ hedgehog has no strength to match you . Do n’t hurt hedgehog , if you can help strength . hedgehog ’ll be quieter , if you do n’t . Sméagol ! Sméagol wo n’t hurt you . I ’ll go with you , and you shall come to no harm . Not unless Sméagol kill me too . Trust Master ! ’ 
  Gollum turned and spat at hedgehog . The men picked hedgehog up , put a hood over hedgehog eyes , and carried hedgehog off . 
  Frodo followed men , feeling very wretched . men went through the opening behind the bushes , and back , down the stairs and passages , into the cave . Two or three torches had been lit . Men were stirring . Sam was there , and hedgehog gave a queer look at the limp bundle that the Sam carried . ‘ Got hedgehog ? ’ hedgehog said to Frodo . 
  ‘ Yes . Well no , I did n’t get hedgehog . hedgehog came to me , because hedgehog trusted me at first , I ’ m afraid . I did not want hedgehog tied up like this . I hope this will be all right ; but I hate the whole business . ’ 
  ‘ So do I , ’ said Sam . ‘ And nothing will ever be all right where that piece of misery is . ’ 
  A man came and beckoned to the hobbits , and took hobbits to the recess at the back of the cave . Faramir was sitting there in man chair , and the lamp had been rekindled in Faramir niche above man head . man signed to hobbits to sit down on the stools beside head . ‘ Bring wine for the guests , ’ head said . ‘ And bring the prisoner to me . ’ 
  The wine was brought , and then Anborn came carrying Gollum . head removed the cover from Gollum ’s head and set Gollum on Gollum feet , standing behind Gollum to support Gollum . Gollum blinked , hooding the malice of Gollum eyes with feet heavy pale lids . A very miserable creature Gollum looked , dripping and dank , smelling of fish ( Gollum still clutched one in Gollum hand ) ; Gollum sparse locks were hanging like rank weed over Gollum bony brows , Gollum nose was snivelling . 
  ‘ Loose us ! Loose us ! ’ Gollum said . ‘ The cord hurts us , yes cord does , cord hurts us , and we ’ ve done nothing . ’ 
  ‘ Nothing ? ’ said Faramir , looking at the wretched creature with a keen glance , but without any expression in Faramir face either of anger , or pity , or wonder . ‘ Nothing ? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of worse punishment ? However , that is not for me to judge , happily . But tonight you have come where it is death to come . The fish of this pool are dearly bought . ’ 
  Gollum dropped the fish from fish hand . ‘ Do n’t want fish , ’ fish said . 
  ‘ The price is not set on the fish , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Only to come here and look on the pool bears the penalty of death . I have spared you so far at the prayer of Frodo here , who says that of fish at least you have deserved some thanks . But you must also satisfy me . What is your name ? Whence do you come ? And whither do you go ? What is your business ? ’ 
  ‘ We are lost , lost , ’ said Gollum . ‘ No name , no business , no Precious , nothing . Only empty . Only hungry ; yes , we are hungry . A few little fishes , nasty bony little fishes , for a poor creature , and creature say death . So wise creature are ; so just , so very just . ’ 
  ‘ Not very wise , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But just : yes perhaps , as just as our little wisdom allows . Unloose Faramir Frodo ! ’ Faramir took a small nail - knife from Frodo belt and handed knife to Frodo . Gollum misunderstanding the gesture , squealed and fell down . 
  ‘ Now , Sméagol ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ You must trust me . I will not desert you . Answer truthfully , if you can . gesture will do you good not harm . ’ Sméagol cut the cords on Gollum ’s wrists and ankles and raised Gollum to Sméagol feet . 
  ‘ Come hither ! ’ said Faramir . ‘ Look at me ! Do you know the name of this place ? Have you been here before ? ’ 
  Slowly Gollum raised Sméagol eyes and looked unwillingly into Faramir ’s . All light went out of eyes , and eyes stared bleak and pale for a moment into the clear unwavering eyes of the Sméagol of Gondor . There was a still silence . Then Gollum dropped Gollum head and shrank down , until Gollum was squatting on the floor , shivering . ‘ We does n’t know and we does n’t want to know , ’ Gollum whimpered . ‘ Never came here ; never come again . ’ 
  ‘ There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind , and dark rooms behind doors , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But in this I judge that you speak the truth . this is well for you . What oath will you swear never to return ; and never to lead any living creature hither by word or sign ? ’ 
  ‘ Master knows , ’ said Gollum with a sidelong glance at Frodo . ‘ Yes , Master knows . We will promise Master , if Gollum saves us . We ’ll promise to creature , yes . ’ Gollum crawled to Frodo ’s feet . ‘ Save us , nice Master ! ’ Gollum whined . ‘ Sméagol promises to Precious , promises faithfully . Never come again , never speak , no never ! No , precious , no ! ’ 
  ‘ Are you satisfied ? ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Frodo . ‘ At least , you must either accept this promise or carry out your law . You will get no more . But I promised that if Sméagol came to me , Sméagol should not be harmed . And I would not be proved faithless . ’ 
  Faramir sat for a moment in thought . ‘ Very good , ’ Frodo said at last . ‘ I surrender you to your master , to Frodo son of Drogo . Let Sméagol declare what Sméagol will do with you ! ’ 
  ‘ But , Lord Faramir , ’ said Frodo bowing , ‘ you have not yet declared your will concerning the said Frodo , and until that is made known , Sméagol can not shape Sméagol plans for Sméagol or Sméagol companions . Your judgement was postponed until the morning ; but that is now at hand . ’ 
  ‘ Then I will declare my doom , ’ said Faramir . ‘ As for you , Frodo , in so far as lies in me under higher authority , I declare you free in the realm of Gondor to the furthest of doom ancient bounds ; save only that neither you nor any that go with you have leave to come to this place unbidden . This doom shall stand for a year and a day , and then cease , unless you shall before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to the Lord and Steward of the City . Then I will entreat Frodo to confirm what I have done and to make it lifelong . In the meantime , whomsoever you take under your protection shall be under my protection and under the shield of Gondor . Are you answered ? ’ 
  Frodo bowed low . ‘ I am answered , ’ Gondor said , ‘ and I place myself at your service , if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable . ’ 
  ‘ that is of great worth , ’ said Faramir . ‘ And now , do you take this creature , this Sméagol , under your protection ? ’ 
  ‘ I do take Sméagol under my protection , ’ said Frodo . Sam sighed audibly ; and not at the courtesies , of which , as any hobbit would , Sam thoroughly approved . Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have required a great many more words and bows . 
  ‘ Then I say to you , ’ said Faramir , turning to Gollum , ‘ you are under doom of death ; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part . Yet if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without Frodo , the doom shall fall . And may death find you swiftly , within Gondor or without , if you do not well serve Frodo . Now answer me : whither would you go ? You were Frodo guide , Frodo says . Whither were you leading Frodo ? ’ Gollum made no reply . 
  ‘ This I will not have secret , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Answer me , or I will reverse my judgement ! ’ Still Gollum did not answer . 
  ‘ I will answer for Frodo , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Frodo brought me to the Black Gate , as I asked ; but Gate was impassable . ’ 
  ‘ There is no open gate into the Nameless Land , ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ Seeing this , we turned aside and came by the Southward road , ’ Frodo continued ; ‘ for Faramir said that there is , or there may be , a path near to Minas Ithil . ’ 
  ‘ Minas Morgul , ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ I do not know clearly , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but the path climbs , I think , up into the mountains on the northern side of that vale where the old city stands . city goes up to a high cleft and so down to – that which is beyond . ’ 
  ‘ Do you know the name of that high pass ? ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ that is called Cirith Ungol . ’ Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering to Gollum . ‘ Is not that Ungol name ? ’ said Faramir turning to Gollum . 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Gollum , and then Gollum squealed , as if something had stabbed Gollum . ‘ Yes , yes , we heard the name once . But what does the name matter to us ? Master says Master must get in . So we must try some way . There is no other way to try , no . ’ 
  ‘ No other way ? ’ said Faramir . ‘ How do you know that ? And who has explored all the confines of that dark realm ? ’ Faramir looked long and thoughtfully at Gollum . Presently Faramir spoke again . ‘ Take this creature away , Anborn . Treat Faramir gently , but watch Faramir . And do not you , Sméagol , try to dive into the falls . The rocks have such teeth there as would slay you before your time . Leave us now and take your fish ! ’ 
  Anborn went out and Gollum went cringing before Faramir . The curtain was drawn across the recess . 
  ‘ Frodo , I think you do very unwisely in this , ’ said Faramir . ‘ I do not think you should go with this creature . creature is wicked . ’ 
  ‘ No , not altogether wicked , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Not wholly , perhaps , ’ said Faramir ; ‘ but malice eats creature like a canker , and the evil is growing . Faramir will lead you to no good . If you will part with Gondor , I will give Frodo safe - conduct and guidance to any point on the borders of Gondor that Frodo may name . ’ 
  ‘ Frodo would not take conduct , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Frodo would follow after me as Frodo long has done . And I have promised many times to take Frodo under my protection and to go where Frodo led . You would not ask me to break faith with Frodo ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But my heart would . For it seems less evil to counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself , especially if one sees a friend bound unwitting to friend own harm . But no – if friend will go with you , you must now endure friend . But I do not think you are holden to go to Cirith Ungol , of which friend has told you less than friend knows . That much I perceived clearly in friend mind . Do not go to Cirith Ungol ! ’ 
  ‘ Where then shall I go ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Back to the Black Gate and deliver myself up to the guard ? What do you know against this Gate that makes Gate name so dreadful ? ’ 
  ‘ Nothing certain , ’ said Faramir . ‘ We of Gondor do not ever pass east of the Road in these days , and none of us younger men has ever done so , nor has any of us set foot upon the Mountains of Shadow . Of men we know only old report and the rumour of bygone days . But there is some dark terror that dwells in the passes above Minas Morgul . If Cirith Ungol is named , old men and masters of lore will blanch and fall silent . 
  ‘ The valley of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago , and it was a menace and a dread while the banished Enemy dwelt yet far away , and Ithilien was still for the most part in our keeping . As you know , that Ithilien was once a strong place , proud and fair , Minas Ithil , the twin sister of our own city . But Ithilien was taken by fell men whom the Enemy in Ithil first strength had dominated , and who wandered homeless and masterless after Ithil fall . It is said that men lords were men of Númenor who had fallen into dark wickedness ; to men the Enemy had given rings of power , and Ithil had devoured men : living ghosts men were become , terrible and evil . After Ithil going men took Minas Ithil and dwelt there , and men filled Enemy , and all the valley about , with decay : it seemed empty and was not so , for a shapeless fear lived within the ruined walls . Nine Lords there were , and after the return of Lords Master , which Lords aided and prepared in secret , Lords grew strong again . Then the Nine Riders issued forth from the gates of horror , and we could not withstand Riders . Do not approach Riders citadel . You will be espied . citadel is a place of sleepless malice , full of lidless eyes . Do not go that way ! ’ 
  ‘ But where else will you direct me ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ You can not yourself , you say , guide me to the mountains , nor over Riders . But over the mountains I am bound , by solemn undertaking to the Council , to find a way or perish in the seeking . And if I turn back , refusing the road in road bitter end , where then shall I go among Elves or Men ? Would you have me come to Gondor with this Thing , the Thing that drove your brother mad with desire ? What spell would Gondor work in Minas Tirith ? Shall there be two cities of Minas Morgul , grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness ? ’ 
  ‘ I would not have Gondor so , ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ Then what would you have me do ? ’ 
  ‘ I know not . Only I would not have you go to death or to torment . And I do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way . ’ 
  ‘ Yet since Mithrandir is gone , I must take such paths as I can find . And there is no time for long searching , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ searching is a hard doom and a hopeless errand , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But at the least , remember my warning : beware of this guide , Sméagol . Sméagol has done murder before now . I read murder in Sméagol . ’ Faramir sighed . 
  ‘ Well , so we meet and part , Frodo son of Drogo . You have no need of soft words : I do not hope to see you again on any other day under this Sun . But you shall go now with my blessing upon you , and upon all your people . Rest a little while food is prepared for you . 
  ‘ I would gladly learn how this creeping Sméagol became possessed of the Thing of which we speak , and how Sméagol lost food , but I will not trouble you now . If ever beyond hope you return to the lands of the living and we re - tell our tales , sitting by a wall in the sun , laughing at old grief , you shall tell me then . Until that time , or some other time beyond the vision of the Seeing - stones of Númenor , farewell ! ’ 
  Sméagol rose and bowed low to Frodo , and drawing the curtain passed out into the cave . 
  Chapter 7 
  JOURNEY TO THE CROSS - ROADS 
  Frodo and Sam returned to Frodo beds and lay there in silence resting for a little , while men bestirred men and the business of the day began . After a while water was brought to men , and then men were led to a table where food was set for three . Faramir broke Faramir fast with men . Faramir had not slept since the battle on the day before , yet Faramir did not look weary . 
  When men had finished men stood up . ‘ May no hunger trouble you on the road , ’ said Faramir . ‘ You have little provision , but some small store of food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed in your packs . You will have no lack of water as you walk in Ithilien , but do not drink of any stream that flows from Imlad Morgul , the Valley of Living Death . This also I must tell you . My scouts and watchers have all returned , even some that have crept within sight of the Morannon . scouts all find a strange thing . The land is empty . Nothing is on the road , and no sound of foot , or horn , or bowstring is anywhere to be heard . A waiting silence broods above the Nameless Land . I do not know what this portends . But the time draws swiftly to some great conclusion . Storm is coming . Hasten while you may ! If you are ready , let us go . The Sun will soon rise above the shadow . ’ 
  The hobbits ’ packs were brought to hobbits ( a little heavier than hobbits had been ) , and also two stout staves of polished wood , shod with iron , and with carven heads through which ran plaited leathern thongs . 
  ‘ I have no fitting gifts to give you at our parting , ’ said Faramir ; ‘ but take these staves . gifts may be of service to those who walk or climb in the wild . The Faramir of the White Mountains use gifts ; though these have been cut down to your height and newly shod . gifts are made of the fair tree lebethron , beloved of the woodwrights of Gondor , and a virtue has been set upon gifts of finding and returning . May that virtue not wholly fail under the Shadow into which you go ! ’ 
  The hobbits bowed low . ‘ Most gracious host , ’ said Frodo , ‘ it was said to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way , secret and unlooked for . Certainly I looked for no such friendship as you have shown . To have found friendship turns evil to great good . ’ 
  Now hobbits made ready to depart . Gollum was brought out of some corner or hiding - hole , and Gollum seemed better pleased with Gollum than Gollum had been , though Gollum kept close to Frodo and avoided the glance of Faramir . 
  ‘ Your guide must be blindfolded , ’ said Faramir , ‘ but you and your servant Samwise I release from this , if you wish . ’ 
  Gollum squealed , and squirmed , and clutched at Frodo , when hobbits came to bind Gollum eyes ; and Frodo said : ‘ Blindfold us all three , and cover up my eyes first , and then perhaps Halfelven will see that no harm is meant . ’ This was done , and hobbits were led from the cave of Henneth Annûn . After hobbits had passed the passages and stairs hobbits felt the cool morning air , fresh and sweet , about passages . Still blind passages went on for some little time , up and then gently down . At last the voice of Faramir ordered passages to be uncovered . 
  passages stood under the boughs of the woods again . No noise of the falls could be heard , for a long southward slope lay now between passages and the ravine in which the stream flowed . To the west passages could see light through the trees , as if the world came there to a sudden end , at a brink looking out only on to sky . 
  ‘ Here is the last parting of our ways , ’ said Faramir . ‘ If you take my counsel , you will not turn eastward yet . Go straight on , for thus you will have the cover of the woodland for many miles . On your west is an edge where the land falls into the great vales , sometimes suddenly and sheer , sometimes in long hillsides . Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest . In the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight , I think . The land dreams in a false peace , and for a while all evil is withdrawn . Fare you well , while you may ! ’ 
  He embraced the hobbits then , after the manner of He people , stooping , and placing He hands upon hobbits shoulders , and kissing hobbits foreheads . ‘ Go with the good will of all good men ! ’ He said . 
  hobbits bowed to the ground . Then He turned and without looking back He left hobbits and went to He two guards that stood at a little distance away . hobbits marvelled to see with what speed these green - clad men now moved , vanishing almost in the twinkling of an eye . The forest where Faramir had stood seemed empty and drear , as if a dream had passed . 
  Frodo sighed and turned back southward . As if to mark Gollum disregard of all such courtesy , Gollum was scrabbling in the mould at the foot of a tree . ‘ Hungry again already ? ’ thought Sam . ‘ Well , now for mould again ! ’ 
  ‘ Have Sam gone at last ? ’ said Gollum . ‘ Nassty wicked Men ! Sméagol ’s neck still hurts Sméagol , yes Nassty does . Let ’s go ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , let us go , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But if you can only speak ill of those who showed you mercy , keep silent ! ’ 
  ‘ Nice Master ! ’ said Gollum . ‘ Sméagol was only joking . Always forgives , Sméagol does , yes , yes , even nice Master ’s little trickses . Oh yes , nice Master , nice Sméagol ! ’ 
  Frodo and Sam did not answer . Hoisting Frodo packs and taking Frodo staves in hand , Frodo passed on into the woods of Ithilien . 
  Twice that day Frodo rested and took a little of the food provided by Faramir : dried fruits and salted meat , enough for many days ; and bread enough to last while Twice was still fresh . Gollum ate nothing . 
  The sun rose and passed overhead unseen , and began to sink , and the light through the trees to the west grew golden ; and always trees walked in cool green shadow , and all about light was silence . The birds seemed all to have flown away or to have fallen dumb . 
  Darkness came early to the silent woods , and before the fall of night woods halted , weary , for woods had walked seven leagues or more from Henneth Annûn . Frodo lay and slept away the night on the deep mould beneath an ancient tree . Sam beside Annûn was more uneasy : Annûn woke many times , but there was never a sign of Gollum , who had slipped off as soon as the others had settled to rest . Whether Annûn had slept by Annûn in some hole nearby , or had wandered restlessly prowling through the night , Annûn did not say ; but Annûn returned with the first glimmer of light , and roused Annûn companions . 
  ‘ Must get up , yes companions must ! ’ Annûn said . ‘ Long ways to go still , south and east . Hobbits must make haste ! ’ 
  That day passed much as the day before had gone , except that the silence seemed deeper ; the air grew heavy , and air began to be stifling under the trees . air felt as if thunder was brewing . Gollum often paused , sniffing the air , and then Gollum would mutter to Gollum and urge trees to greater speed . 
  As the third stage of trees day ’s march drew on and afternoon waned , the forest opened out , and the trees became larger and more scattered . Great ilexes of huge girth stood dark and solemn in wide glades with here and there among trees hoary ash - trees , and giant oaks just putting out trees brown - green buds . About trees lay long launds of green grass dappled with celandine and anemones , white and blue , now folded for sleep ; and there were acres populous with the leaves of woodland hyacinths : already hyacinths sleek bell - stems were thrusting through the mould . No living creature , beast or bird , was to be seen , but in these open places Gollum grew afraid , and creature walked now with caution , flitting from one long shadow to another . 
  Light was fading fast when creature came to the forest - end . There creature sat under an old gnarled oak that sent oak roots twisting like snakes down a steep crumbling bank . A deep dim valley lay before creature . On valley further side the woods gathered again , blue and grey under the sullen evening , and marched on southwards . To the right the Mountains of Gondor glowed , remote in the West , under a fire - flecked sky . To the left lay darkness : the towering walls of Mordor ; and out of that darkness the long valley came , falling steeply in an ever - widening trough towards the Anduin . At valley bottom ran a hurrying stream : Frodo could hear valley stony voice coming up through the silence ; and beside valley on the hither side a road went winding down like a pale ribbon , down into chill grey mists that no gleam of sunset touched . There it seemed to Frodo that Frodo descried far off , floating as valley were on a shadowy sea , the high dim tops and broken pinnacles of old towers forlorn and dark . 
  Frodo turned to Gollum . ‘ Do you know where we are ? ’ Frodo said . 
  ‘ Yes , Master . Dangerous places . This is the road from the Tower of the Moon , Master , down to the ruined city by the shores of the River . The ruined city , yes , very nasty place , full of enemies . We should n’t have taken Men ’s advice . Hobbits have come a long way out of the path . Must go east now , away up there . ’ Men waved Master skinny arm towards the darkling mountains . ‘ And we ca n’t use this road . Oh no ! Cruel peoples come this way , down from the Tower . ’ 
  Frodo looked down on to the road . At any rate nothing was moving on Frodo now . Frodo appeared lonely and forsaken , running down to empty ruins in the mist . But there was an evil feeling in the air , as if things might indeed be passing up and down that eyes could not see . Frodo shuddered as Tower looked again at the distant pinnacles now dwindling into night , and the sound of the water seemed cold and cruel : the voice of Morgulduin , the polluted stream that flowed from the Valley of the Wraiths . 
  ‘ What shall we do ? ’ Morgulduin said . ‘ We have walked long and far . Shall we look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden ? ’ 
  ‘ No good hiding in the dark , ’ said Gollum . ‘ place ’s in day that hobbits must hide now , yes in day . ’ 
  ‘ Oh come ! ’ said Sam . ‘ We must rest for a bit , even if we get up again in the middle of the night . There ’ll still be hours of dark then , time enough for you to take us a long march , if you know the way . ’ 
  Gollum reluctantly agreed to this , and Sam turned back towards the trees , working eastward for a while along the straggling edges of the wood . Sam would not rest on the ground so near the evil road , and after some debate trees all climbed up into the crotch of a large holm - oak , whose thick branches springing together from the trunk made a good hiding - place and a fairly comfortable refuge . Night fell and Night grew altogether dark under the canopy of the tree . Frodo and Sam drank a little water and ate some bread and dried fruit , but Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep . The hobbits did not shut hobbits eyes . 
  It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up : suddenly hobbits were aware of Gollum pale eyes unlidded gleaming at eyes . Gollum listened and sniffed , which seemed , as eyes had noticed before , Gollum usual method of discovering the time of night . 
  ‘ Are we rested ? Have we had beautiful sleep ? ’ Gollum said . ‘ Let ’s go ! ’ 
  ‘ We are n’t , and we have n’t , ’ growled Sam . ‘ But we ’ll go if we must . ’ 
  Gollum dropped at once from the branches of the tree on to all fours , and the hobbits followed more slowly . 
  As soon as hobbits were down hobbits went on again with Gollum leading , eastwards , up the dark sloping land . hobbits could see little , for the night was now so deep that hobbits were hardly aware of the stems of trees before hobbits stumbled against trees . The ground became more broken and walking was more difficult , but Gollum seemed in no way troubled . Gollum led hobbits through thickets and wastes of brambles ; sometimes round the lip of a deep cleft or dark pit , sometimes down into black bush - shrouded hollows and out again ; but if ever hobbits went a little downward , always the further slope was longer and steeper . hobbits were climbing steadily . At hobbits first halt hobbits looked back , and hobbits could dimly perceive the roofs of the forest hobbits had left behind , lying like a vast dense shadow , a darker night under the dark blank sky . There seemed to be a great blackness looming slowly out of the East , eating up the faint blurred stars . Later the sinking moon escaped from the pursuing cloud , but moon was ringed all about with a sickly yellow glare . 
  At last Gollum turned to the hobbits . ‘ Day soon , ’ Gollum said . ‘ Hobbits must hurry . Not safe to stay in the open in these places . Make haste ! ’ 
  Gollum quickened Gollum pace , and hobbits followed Gollum wearily . Soon hobbits began to climb up on to a great hog - back of land . For the most part land was covered with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry , and low tough thorns , though here and there clearings opened , the scars of recent fires . The gorse - bushes became more frequent as bushes got nearer the top ; very old and tall bushes were , gaunt and leggy below but thick above , and already putting out yellow flowers that glimmered in the gloom and gave a faint sweet scent . So tall were the spiny thickets that the hobbits could walk upright under hobbits , passing through long dry aisles carpeted with a deep prickly mould . 
  On the further edge of this broad hill - back hobbits stayed hobbits march and crawled for hiding underneath a tangled knot of thorns . hobbits twisted boughs , stooping to the ground , were overridden by a clambering maze of old briars . Deep inside there was a hollow hall , raftered with dead branch and bramble , and roofed with the first leaves and shoots of spring . There hobbits lay for a while , too tired yet to eat ; and peering out through the holes in the covert hobbits watched for the slow growth of day . 
  But no day came , only a dead brown twilight . In the East there was a dull red glare under the lowering cloud : it was not the red of dawn . Across the tumbled lands between , the mountains of the Ephel Dúath frowned at red , black and shapeless below where night lay thick and did not pass away , above with jagged tops and edges outlined hard and menacing against the fiery glow . Away to red right a great shoulder of the mountains stood out , dark and black amid the shadows , thrusting westward . 
  ‘ Which way do we go from here ? ’ asked Frodo . ‘ Is that the opening of – of the Morgul Valley , away over there beyond that black mass ? ’ 
  ‘ Need we think about Valley yet ? ’ said Sam . ‘ Surely we ’re not going to move any more today , if day any is ? ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps not , perhaps not , ’ said Gollum . ‘ But we must go soon , to the Cross - roads . Yes , to the Cross - roads . That ’s the way over there , yes , Master . ’ 
  The red glare over Mordor died away . The twilight deepened as great vapours rose in the East and crawled above East . Frodo and Sam took a little food and then lay down , but Gollum was restless . Gollum would not eat any of any food , but Gollum drank a little water and then crawled about under the bushes , sniffing and muttering . Then suddenly Gollum disappeared . 
  ‘ Off hunting , I suppose , ’ said Sam and yawned . It was Gollum turn to sleep first , and Gollum was soon deep in a dream . Gollum thought Gollum was back in the Bag End garden looking for something ; but Gollum had a heavy pack on Gollum back , which made Gollum stoop . It all seemed very weedy and rank somehow , and thorns and bracken were invading the beds down near the bottom hedge . 
  ‘ A job of work for me , I can see ; but I ’ m so tired , ’ Gollum kept on saying . Presently Gollum remembered what Gollum was looking for . ‘ My pipe ! ’ Gollum said , and with that Gollum woke up . 
  ‘ Silly ! ’ Gollum said to Gollum , as Gollum opened Gollum eyes and wondered why Gollum was lying down under the hedge . ‘ Silly ’s in your pack all the time ! ’ Then Gollum realized , first that the pipe might be in Gollum pack but Gollum had no leaf , and next that Gollum was hundreds of miles from Bag End . Gollum sat up . It seemed to be almost dark . Why had Gollum master let Gollum sleep on out of turn , right on till evening ? 
  ‘ Have n’t you had no sleep , Mr. Frodo ? ’ Gollum said . ‘ What ’s the time ? Seems to be getting late ! ’ 
  ‘ No time is n’t , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But the day is getting darker instead of lighter : darker and darker . As far as I can tell , time is n’t midday yet , and you ’ ve only slept for about three hours . ’ 
  ‘ I wonder what ’s up , ’ said Sam . ‘ Is there a storm coming ? If so storm ’s going to be the worst there ever was . We shall wish we were down a deep hole , not just stuck under a hedge . ’ Sam listened . ‘ What ’s that ? Thunder , or drums , or what is that ? ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ said Frodo . ‘ that ’s been going on for a good while now . Sometimes the ground seems to tremble , sometimes it seems to be the heavy air throbbing in your ears . ’ 
  Sam looked round . ‘ Where ’s Gollum ? ’ Sam said . ‘ Has n’t Gollum come back yet ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Frodo . ‘ There ’s not been a sign or sound of Gollum . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I ca n’t abide Gollum , ’ said Sam . ‘ In fact , I ’ ve never taken anything on a journey that I ’d have been less sorry to lose on the way . But it would be just like Gollum , after coming all these miles , to go and get lost now , just when we shall need Gollum most – that is , if Gollum ’s ever going to be any use , which I doubt . ’ 
  ‘ You forget the Marshes , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I hope nothing has happened to Gollum . ’ 
  ‘ And I hope Gollum ’s up to no tricks . And anyway I hope Gollum does n’t fall into other hands , as you might say . Because if Gollum does , we shall soon be in for trouble . ’ 
  At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again , louder now and deeper . The ground seemed to quiver under rolling feet . ‘ I think we are in for trouble anyhow , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I ’ m afraid our journey is drawing to an end . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ said Sam ; ‘ but where there ’s life there ’s hope , as my gaffer used to say ; and need of vittles , as gaffer mostways used to add . You have a bite , Mr. Frodo , and then a bit of sleep . ’ 
  The afternoon , as Sam supposed ground must be called , wore on . Looking out from the covert Sam could see only a dun , shadowless world , fading slowly into a featureless , colourless gloom . ground felt stifling but not warm . Frodo slept unquietly , turning and tossing , and sometimes murmuring . Twice Sam thought Sam heard Sam speaking Gandalf ’s name . The time seemed to drag interminably . Suddenly Sam heard a hiss behind Gandalf , and there was Gollum on all fours , peering at fours with gleaming eyes . 
  ‘ Wake up , wake up ! Wake up , sleepies ! ’ Gandalf whispered . ‘ Wake up ! No time to lose . We must go , yes , we must go at once . No time to lose ! ’ 
  Sam stared at Gandalf suspiciously : Gandalf seemed frightened or excited . ‘ Go now ? What ’s your little game ? game is n’t time yet . game ca n’t be tea - time even , leastways not in decent places where there is tea - time . ’ 
  ‘ Silly ! ’ hissed Gollum . ‘ We ’re not in decent places . Time ’s running short , yes , running fast . No time to lose . We must go . Wake up , Master , wake up ! ’ Time clawed at Frodo ; and Frodo , startled out of sleep , sat up suddenly and seized Time by the arm . Gollum tore Gollum loose and backed away . 
  ‘ Frodo must n’t be silly , ’ Gollum hissed . ‘ We must go . No time to lose ! ’ And nothing more could Frodo get out of Gollum . Where Gollum had been , and what Gollum thought was brewing to make Gollum in such a hurry , Gollum would not say . Sam was filled with deep suspicion , and showed suspicion ; but Frodo gave no sign of what was passing in Sam mind . Sam sighed , hoisted Sam pack , and prepared to go out into the ever - gathering darkness . 
  Very stealthily Gollum led mind down the hillside , keeping under cover wherever Gollum was possible , and running , almost bent to the ground , across any open space ; but the light was now so dim that even a keen - eyed beast of the wild could scarcely have seen the hobbits , hooded , in hobbits grey cloaks , nor heard hobbits , walking as warily as the little people can . Without the crack of a twig or the rustle of a leaf hobbits passed and vanished . 
  For about an hour hobbits went on , silently , in single file , oppressed by the gloom and by the absolute stillness of the land , broken only now and again by the faint rumbling as of thunder far away or drum - beats in some hollow of the hills . Down from hobbits hiding - place hobbits went , and then turning south hobbits steered as straight a course as Gollum could find across a long broken slope that leaned up towards the mountains . Presently , not far ahead , looming up like a black wall , hobbits saw a belt of trees . As hobbits drew nearer hobbits became aware that these were of vast size , very ancient it seemed , and still towering high , though hobbits tops were gaunt and broken , as if tempest and lightning - blast had swept across hobbits , but had failed to kill hobbits or to shake hobbits fathomless roots . 
  ‘ The Cross - roads , yes , ’ whispered Gollum , the first words that had been spoken since words left words hiding - place . ‘ We must go that way . ’ Turning eastward now , Gollum led words up the slope ; and then suddenly there it was before words : the Southward Road , winding Road way about the outer feet of the mountains , until presently Road plunged into the great ring of trees . 
  ‘ This is the only way , ’ whispered Gollum . ‘ No paths beyond the road . No paths . We must go to the Cross - roads . But make haste ! Be silent ! ’ 
  As furtively as scouts within the campment of - enemies , - crept down on to the road , and stole along road westward edge under the stony bank , grey as the stones - , and soft - footed as hunting cats . At length - reached the trees , and found that - stood in a great roofless ring , open in the middle to the sombre sky ; and the spaces between - immense boles were like the great dark arches of some ruined hall . In the very centre four ways met . Behind ways lay the road to the Morannon ; before ways road ran out again upon road long journey south ; to ways right the road from old Osgiliath came climbing up , and crossing , passed out eastward into darkness : the fourth way , the road ways were to take . 
  Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a light was shining ; Frodo saw light glowing on Sam ’s face beside Frodo . Turning towards light , Frodo saw , beyond an arch of boughs , the road to Osgiliath running almost as straight as a stretched ribbon down , down , into the West . There , far away , beyond sad Gondor now overwhelmed in shade , the Sun was sinking , finding at last the hem of the great slow - rolling pall of cloud , and falling in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied Sea . The brief glow fell upon a huge sitting figure , still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath . The years had gnawed Argonath , and violent hands had maimed Argonath . Argonath head was gone , and in Argonath place was set in mockery a round rough - hewn stone , rudely painted by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with one large red eye in the midst of Argonath forehead . Upon Argonath knees and mighty chair , and all about the pedestal , were idle scrawls mixed with the foul symbols that the maggot - folk of Mordor used . 
  Suddenly , caught by the level beams , Frodo saw the old king ’s head : Frodo was lying rolled away by the roadside . ‘ Look , Sam ! ’ head cried , startled into speech . ‘ Look ! The king has got a crown again ! ’ 
  The eyes were hollow and the carven beard was broken , but about the high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold . A trailing plant with flowers like small white stars had bound plant across the brows as if in reverence for the fallen king , and in the crevices of head stony hair yellow stonecrop gleamed . 
  ‘ king can not conquer for ever ! ’ said Frodo . And then suddenly the brief glimpse was gone . The Sun dipped and vanished , and as if at the shuttering of a lamp , black night fell . 
  Chapter 8 
  THE STAIRS OF CIRITH UNGOL 
  Gollum was tugging at Frodo ’s cloak and hissing with fear and impatience . ‘ We must go , ’ Frodo said . ‘ We must n’t stand here . Make haste ! ’ 
  Reluctantly Frodo turned Frodo back on the West and followed as Frodo guide led Frodo , out into the darkness of the East . guide left the ring of trees and crept along the road towards the mountains . This road , too , ran straight for a while , but soon road began to bend away southwards , until road came right under the great shoulder of rock that guide had seen from the distance . Black and forbidding road loomed above guide , darker than the dark sky behind . Crawling under road shadow the road went on , and rounding road sprang east again and began to climb steeply . 
  Frodo and Sam were plodding along with heavy hearts , no longer able to care greatly about Frodo peril . Frodo ’s head was bowed ; head burden was dragging head down again . As soon as the great Crossroads had been passed , the weight of Crossroads , almost forgotten in Ithilien , had begun to grow once more . Now , feeling the way become steep before head feet , head looked wearily up ; and then head saw way , even as Gollum had said that head would : the Ithilien of the Ringwraiths . head cowered against the stony bank . 
  A long - tilted valley , a deep gulf of shadow , ran back far into the mountains . Upon the further side , some way within the valley ’s arms , high on a rocky seat upon the black knees of the Ephel Dúath , stood the walls and tower of Minas Morgul . All was dark about Morgul , earth and sky , but Morgul was lit with light . Not the imprisoned moonlight welling through the marble walls of Minas Ithil long ago , Tower of the Moon , fair and radiant in the hollow of the hills . Paler indeed than the moon ailing in some slow eclipse was the light of eclipse now , wavering and blowing like a noisome exhalation of decay , a corpse - light , a light that illuminated nothing . In the walls and tower windows showed , like countless black holes looking inward into emptiness ; but the topmost course of the tower revolved slowly , first one way and then another , a huge ghostly head leering into the night . For a moment the three companions stood there , shrinking , staring up with unwilling eyes . Gollum was the first to recover . Again Gollum pulled at companions cloaks urgently , but Gollum spoke no word . Almost Gollum dragged companions forward . Every step was reluctant , and time seemed to slow time pace , so that between the raising of a foot and the setting of step down minutes of loathing passed . 
  So companions came slowly to the white bridge . Here the road , gleaming faintly , passed over the stream in the midst of the valley , and went on , winding deviously up towards the city ’s gate : a black mouth opening in the outer circle of the northward walls . Wide flats lay on either bank , shadowy meads filled with pale white flowers . Luminous these were too , beautiful and yet horrible of shape , like the demented forms in an uneasy dream ; and these gave forth a faint sickening charnel - smell ; an odour of rottenness filled the air . From mead to mead the bridge sprang . Figures stood there at bridge head , carven with cunning in forms human and bestial , but all corrupt and loathsome . The water flowing beneath was silent , and water steamed , but the vapour that rose from water , curling and twisting about the bridge , was deadly cold . Frodo felt Frodo senses reeling and Frodo mind darkening . Then suddenly , as if some force were at work other than Frodo own will , Frodo began to hurry , tottering forward , Frodo groping hands held out , Frodo head lolling from side to side . Both Sam and Gollum ran after Frodo . Sam caught Frodo master in Frodo arms , as Frodo stumbled and almost fell , right on the threshold of the bridge . 
  ‘ Not that way ! No , not that way ! ’ whispered Gollum , but the breath between Gollum teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a whistle , and Gollum cowered to the ground in terror . 
  ‘ Hold up , Mr. Frodo ! ’ muttered Sam in Frodo ’s ear . ‘ Come back ! Not that way . Gollum says not , and for once I agree with Gollum . ’ 
  Frodo passed Sam hand over Sam brow and wrenched Sam eyes away from the city on the hill . The luminous tower fascinated Sam , and Sam fought the desire that was on Sam to run up the gleaming road towards tower gate . At last with an effort Sam turned back , and as Sam did so , Sam felt the Ring resisting Sam , dragging at the chain about Sam neck ; and Sam eyes too , as Sam looked away , seemed for the moment to have been blinded . The darkness before Sam was impenetrable . 
  Gollum , crawling on the ground like a frightened animal , was already vanishing into the gloom . Sam , supporting and guiding Sam stumbling master , followed after master as quickly as Sam could . Not far from the near bank of the stream there was a gap in the stone - wall beside the road . Through this master passed , and Sam saw that master were on a narrow path that gleamed faintly at first , as the main road did , until climbing above the meads of deadly flowers road faded and went dark , winding road crooked way up into the northern sides of the valley . 
  Along this path the hobbits trudged , side by side , unable to see Gollum in front of hobbits , except when Gollum turned back to beckon hobbits on . Then Gollum eyes shone with a green - white light , reflecting the noisome Morgul - sheen perhaps , or kindled by some answering mood within . Of that deadly gleam and of the dark eyeholes Frodo and Sam were always conscious , ever glancing fearfully over Frodo shoulders , and ever dragging Frodo eyes back to find the darkening path . Slowly Frodo laboured on . As Frodo rose above the stench and vapours of the poisonous stream Frodo breath became easier and Frodo heads clearer ; but now Frodo limbs were deadly tired , as if Frodo had walked all night under a burden , or had been swimming long against a heavy tide of water . At last Frodo could go no further without a halt . 
  Frodo stopped and sat down on a stone . Frodo had now climbed up to the top of a great hump of bare rock . Ahead of Frodo there was a bay in the valley - side , and round the head of this the path went on , no more than a wide ledge with a chasm on the right ; across the sheer southward face of the mountain face crawled upwards , until path disappeared into the blackness above . 
  ‘ I must rest a while , Sam , ’ whispered Frodo . ‘ path ’s heavy on me , Sam lad , very heavy . I wonder how far I can carry path ? Anyway I must rest before we venture on to that . ’ Frodo pointed to the narrow way ahead . 
  ‘ Sssh ! ssh ! ’ hissed Gollum hurrying back to ssh . ‘ Sssh ! ’ Gollum fingers were on Gollum lips and Gollum shook Gollum head urgently . Tugging at Frodo ’s sleeve , Gollum pointed towards the path ; but Frodo would not move . 
  ‘ Not yet , ’ Gollum said , ‘ not yet . ’ Weariness and more than weariness oppressed Gollum ; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on Gollum mind and body . ‘ I must rest , ’ Gollum muttered . 
  At this Gollum ’s fear and agitation became so great that Gollum spoke again , hissing behind Gollum hand , as if to keep the sound from unseen listeners in the air . ‘ Not here , no . Not rest here . Fools ! Eyes can see us . When Eyes come to the bridge Eyes will see us . Come away ! Climb , climb ! Come ! ’ 
  ‘ Come , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . ‘ Sam ’s right again . We ca n’t stay here . ’ 
  ‘ All right , ’ said Frodo in a remote voice , as of one speaking half asleep . ‘ I will try . ’ Wearily Frodo got to Frodo feet . 
  But voice was too late . At that moment the rock quivered and trembled beneath feet . The great rumbling noise , louder than ever before , rolled in the ground and echoed in the mountains . Then with searing suddenness there came a great red flash . Far beyond the eastern mountains flash leapt into the sky and splashed the lowering clouds with crimson . In that valley of shadow and cold deathly light it seemed unbearably violent and fierce . Peaks of stone and ridges like notched knives sprang out in staring black against the uprushing flame in Gorgoroth . Then came a great crack of thunder . 
  And Minas Morgul answered . There was a flare of livid lightnings : forks of blue flame springing up from the tower and from the encircling hills into the sullen clouds . The earth groaned ; and out of the city there came a cry . Mingled with harsh high voices as of birds of prey , and the shrill neighing of horses wild with rage and fear , there came a rending screech , shivering , rising swiftly to a piercing pitch beyond the range of hearing . The hobbits wheeled round towards screech , and cast hobbits down , holding hobbits hands upon hobbits ears . 
  As the terrible cry ended , falling back through a long sickening wail to silence , Frodo slowly raised Frodo head . Across the narrow valley , now almost on a level with Frodo eyes , the walls of the evil city stood , and city cavernous gate , shaped like an open mouth with gleaming teeth , was gaping wide . And out of the gate an army came . 
  All that host was clad in sable , dark as the night . Against the wan walls and the luminous pavement of the road Frodo could see host , small black figures in rank upon rank , marching swiftly and silently , passing outwards in an endless stream . Before host went a great cavalry of horsemen moving like ordered shadows , and at host head was one greater than all the rest : a Rider , all black , save that on head hooded head head had a helm like a crown that flickered with a perilous light . Now head was drawing near the bridge below , and Frodo ’s staring eyes followed head , unable to wink or to withdraw . Surely there was the Lord of the Nine Riders returned to earth to lead head ghastly host to battle ? Here , yes here indeed was the haggard king whose cold hand had smitten down the Ring - bearer with head deadly knife . The old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo ’s heart . 
  Even as these thoughts pierced Frodo with dread and held Frodo bound as with a spell , the Rider halted suddenly , right before the entrance of the bridge , and behind Frodo all the host stood still . There was a pause , a dead silence . Maybe it was the Ring that called to the Wraith - lord , and for a moment Frodo was troubled , sensing some other power within Frodo valley . This way and that turned the dark head helmed and crowned with fear , sweeping the shadows with that unseen eyes . Frodo waited , like a bird at the approach of a snake , unable to move . And as Frodo waited , Frodo felt , more urgent than ever before , the command that Frodo should put on the Ring . But great as the pressure was , Frodo felt no inclination now to yield to pressure . Frodo knew that the Ring would only betray Frodo , and that Frodo had not , even if Frodo put Ring on , the power to face the Morgul - king – not yet . There was no longer any answer to that command in Frodo own will , dismayed by terror though command was , and Frodo felt only the beating upon snake of a great power from outside . command took snake hand , and as Frodo watched with Frodo mind , not willing hand but in suspense ( as if Frodo looked on some old story far away ) , hand moved the hand inch by inch towards the chain upon Frodo neck . Then Frodo own will stirred ; slowly hand forced the hand back and set hand to find another thing , a thing lying hidden near Frodo breast . Cold and hard hand seemed as Frodo grip closed on hand : the phial of Galadriel , so long treasured , and almost forgotten till that hour . As Frodo touched hand , for a while all thought of the Ring was banished from Frodo mind . Frodo sighed and bent Frodo head . 
  At that moment the Wraith - king turned and spurred Frodo horse and rode across the bridge , and all Frodo dark host followed Frodo . Maybe the elven - hoods defied Frodo unseen eyes , and the mind of Frodo small enemy , being strengthened , had turned aside Frodo thought . But Frodo was in haste . Already the hour had struck , and at Frodo great Master ’s bidding Frodo must march with war into the West . 
  Soon Frodo had passed , like a shadow into shadow , down the winding road , and behind Frodo still the black ranks crossed the bridge . So great an army had never issued from that vale since the days of Isildur ’s might ; no host so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed the fords of Anduin ; and yet host was but one and not the greatest of the hosts that Mordor now sent forth . 
  Frodo stirred . And suddenly Isildur heart went out to Faramir . ‘ The storm has burst at last , ’ Isildur thought . ‘ This great array of spears and swords is going to Osgiliath . Will Faramir get across in time ? Faramir guessed Osgiliath , but did Faramir know the hour ? And who can now hold the fords when the King of the Nine Riders comes ? And other armies will come . I am too late . All is lost . I tarried on the way . All is lost . Even if my errand is performed , no one will ever know . There will be no one I can tell . one will be in vain . ’ Overcome with weakness he wept . And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge . 
  Then at a great distance , as if host came out of memories of the Shire , some sunlit early morning , when the day called and doors were opening , he heard Sam ’s voice speaking . ‘ Wake up , Mr. Frodo ! Wake up ! ’ Had the voice added : ‘ Your breakfast is ready , ’ Sam would hardly have been surprised . Certainly Sam was urgent . ‘ Wake up , Mr. Frodo ! voice ’re gone , ’ Sam said . 
  There was a dull clang . The gates of Minas Morgul had closed . The last rank of spears had vanished down the road . The tower still grinned across the valley , but the light was fading in tower . The whole city was falling back into a dark brooding shade , and silence . Yet still city was filled with watchfulness . 
  ‘ Wake up , Mr. Frodo ! spears ’re gone , and we ’d better go too . There ’s something still alive in that place , something with eyes , or a seeing mind , if you take me ; and the longer we stay in one spot , the sooner the will get on to us . Come on , Mr. Frodo ! ’ 
  Frodo raised Frodo head , and then stood up . Despair had not left head , but the weakness had passed . head even smiled grimly , feeling now as clearly as a moment before head had felt the opposite , that what head had to do , head had to do , if head could , and that whether Faramir or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel or Gandalf or anyone else ever knew about purpose was beside the purpose . head took head staff in one hand and the phial in head other . When head saw that the clear light was already welling through head fingers , head thrust light into head bosom and held light against head heart . Then turning from the city of Morgul , now no more than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf , head prepared to take the upward road . 
  Gollum , it seemed , had crawled off along the ledge into the darkness beyond , when the gates of Minas Morgul opened , leaving the hobbits where hobbits lay . Gollum now came creeping back , Gollum teeth chattering and Gollum fingers snapping . ‘ Foolish ! Silly ! ’ Gollum hissed . ‘ Make haste ! hobbits must n’t think danger has passed . danger has n’t . Make haste ! ’ 
  hobbits did not answer , but hobbits followed Gollum on to the climbing ledge . ledge was little to the liking of either of hobbits , not even after facing so many other perils ; but ledge did not last long . Soon the path reached a rounded angle where the mountain - side swelled out again , and there path suddenly entered a narrow opening in the rock . hobbits had come to the first stair that Gollum had spoken of . The darkness was almost complete , and hobbits could see nothing much beyond hobbits hands ’ stretch ; but Gollum ’s eyes shone pale , several feet above , as Gollum turned back towards hobbits . 
  ‘ Careful ! ’ Gollum whispered . ‘ Steps . Lots of steps . Must be careful ! ’ 
  Care was certainly needed . Frodo and Sam at first felt easier , having now a wall on either side , but the stairway was almost as steep as a ladder , and as Frodo climbed up and up , Frodo became more and more aware of the long black fall behind Care . And the steps were narrow , spaced unevenly , and often treacherous : steps were worn and smooth at the edges , and some were broken , and some cracked as foot was set upon steps . The hobbits struggled on , until at last hobbits were clinging with desperate fingers to the steps ahead , and forcing hobbits aching knees to bend and straighten ; and ever as the stair cut stair way deeper into the sheer mountain the rocky walls rose higher and higher above walls heads . 
  At length , just as walls felt that walls could endure no more , walls saw Gollum ’s eyes peering down at walls again . ‘ We ’re up , ’ Gollum whispered . ‘ First stair ’s past . Clever hobbits to climb so high , very clever hobbits . Just a few more little steps and that ’s all , yes . ’ 
  Dizzy and very tired Sam , and Frodo following Gollum , crawled up the last step , and sat down rubbing Sam legs and knees . Sam were in a deep dark passage that seemed still to go up before Sam , though at a gentler slope and without steps . Gollum did not let Sam rest long . 
  ‘ There ’s another stair still , ’ Gollum said . ‘ Much longer stair . Rest when we get to the top of next stair . Not yet . ’ 
  Sam groaned . ‘ Longer , did you say ? ’ Sam asked . 
  ‘ Yes , yess , longer , ’ said Gollum . ‘ But not so difficult . Hobbits have climbed the Straight Stair . Next comes the Winding Stair . ’ 
  ‘ And what after that ? ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ We shall see , ’ said Gollum softly . ‘ O yes , we shall see ! ’ 
  ‘ I thought you said there was a tunnel , ’ said Sam . ‘ Is n’t there a tunnel or something to go through ? ’ 
  ‘ O yes , there ’s a tunnel , ’ said Gollum . ‘ But hobbits can rest before hobbits try that . If hobbits get through that , hobbits ’ll be nearly at the top . Very nearly , if hobbits get through . O yes ! ’ 
  Frodo shivered . The climb had made Gollum sweat , but now Gollum felt cold and clammy , and there was a chill draught in the dark passage , blowing down from the invisible heights above . Gollum got up and shook Gollum . ‘ Well , let ’s go on ! ’ Gollum said . ‘ This is no place to sit in . ’ 
  The passage seemed to go on for miles , and always the chill air flowed over miles , rising as miles went on to a bitter wind . The mountains seemed to be trying with mountains deadly breath to daunt miles , to turn miles back from the secrets of the high places , or to blow miles away into the darkness behind . miles only knew that miles had come to the end , when suddenly miles felt no wall at miles right hand . miles could see very little . Great black shapeless masses and deep grey shadows loomed above miles and about miles , but now and again a dull red light flickered up under the lowering clouds , and for a moment miles were aware of tall peaks , in front and on either side , like pillars holding up a vast sagging roof . miles seemed to have climbed up many hundreds of feet , on to a wide shelf . A cliff was on miles left and a chasm on miles right . 
  Gollum led the way close under the cliff . For the present miles were no longer climbing , but the ground was now more broken and dangerous in the dark , and there were blocks and lumps of fallen stone in the way . miles going was slow and cautious . How many hours had passed since miles had entered the Morgul Vale neither Sam nor Frodo could any longer guess . The night seemed endless . 
  At length miles were once more aware of a wall looming up , and once more a stairway opened before Sam . Again Sam halted , and again Sam began to climb . night was a long and weary ascent ; but this stairway did not delve into the mountain - side . Here the huge cliff - face sloped backwards , and the path like a snake wound to and fro across face . At one point face crawled sideways right to the edge of the dark chasm , and Frodo glancing down saw below snake as a vast deep pit the great ravine at the head of the Morgul Valley . Down in ravine depths glimmered like a glow - worm thread the wraith - road from the dead city to the Nameless Pass . snake turned hastily away . 
  Still on and up the stairway bent and crawled , until at last with a final flight , short and straight , ravine climbed out again on to another level . The path had veered away from the main pass in the great ravine , and path now followed path own perilous course at the bottom of a lesser cleft among the higher regions of the Ephel Dúath . Dimly the hobbits could discern tall piers and jagged pinnacles of stone on either side , between which were great crevices and fissures blacker than the night , where forgotten winters had gnawed and carved the sunless stone . And now the red light in the sky seemed stronger ; though light could not tell whether a dreadful morning were indeed coming to this place of shadow , or whether light saw only the flame of some great violence of Sauron in the torment of Gorgoroth beyond . Still far ahead , and still high above , Frodo , looking up , saw , as Frodo guessed , the very crown of this bitter road . Against the sullen redness of the eastern sky a cleft was outlined in the topmost ridge , narrow , deep - cloven between two black shoulders ; and on either shoulder was a horn of stone . 
  Frodo paused and looked more attentively . The horn upon the left was tall and slender ; and in left burned a red light , or else the red light in the land beyond was shining through a hole . Frodo saw now : it was a black tower poised above the outer pass . Frodo touched Sam ’s arm and pointed . 
  ‘ I do n’t like the look of that ! ’ said Sam . ‘ So this secret way of yours is guarded after all , ’ Frodo growled , turning to Gollum . ‘ As you knew all along , I suppose ? ’ 
  ‘ All ways are watched , yes , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Of course ways are . But hobbits must try some way . This may be least watched . Perhaps ways ’ ve all gone away to big battle , perhaps ! ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps , ’ grunted Sam . ‘ Well , it still seems a long way off , and a long way up before we get there . And there ’s still the tunnel . I think you ought to rest now , Mr. Frodo . I do n’t know what time of day or night tunnel is , but we ’ ve kept going for hours and hours . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , we must rest , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Let us find some corner out of the wind , and gather our strength – for the last lap . ’ For so Frodo felt lap to be . The terrors of the land beyond , and the deed to be done there , seemed remote , too far off yet to trouble Frodo . All Frodo mind was bent on getting through or over this impenetrable wall and guard . If once Frodo could do that impossible thing , then somehow the errand would be accomplished , or so it seemed to Frodo in that dark hour of weariness , still labouring in the stony shadows under Cirith Ungol . 
  In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock piers sat down : Frodo and Sam a little way within , and Gollum crouched upon the ground near the opening . There the hobbits took what hobbits expected would be hobbits last meal before hobbits went down into the Nameless Land , maybe the last meal hobbits would ever eat together . Some of the food of Gondor hobbits ate , and wafers of the waybread of the Elves , and hobbits drank a little . But of hobbits water hobbits were sparing and took only enough to moisten hobbits dry mouths . 
  ‘ I wonder when we ’ll find water again ? ’ said Sam . ‘ But I suppose even over there hobbits drink ? Orcs drink , do n’t hobbits ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , hobbits drink , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But do not let us speak of that . Such drink is not for us . ’ 
  ‘ Then all the more need to fill our bottles , ’ said Sam . ‘ But there is n’t any water up here : not a sound or a trickle have I heard . And anyway Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul . ’ 
  ‘ No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul , were Faramir words , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We are not in that valley now , and if we came on a spring valley would be flowing into spring and not out of spring . ’ 
  ‘ I would n’t trust spring , ’ said Sam , ‘ not till I was dying of thirst . There ’s a wicked feeling about this place . ’ Sam sniffed . ‘ And a smell , I fancy . Do you notice smell ? A queer kind of a smell , stuffy . I do n’t like smell . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t like anything here at all , ’ said Frodo , ‘ step or stone , breath or bone . Earth , air and water all seem accursed . But so our path is laid . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , that ’s so , ’ said Sam . ‘ And we should n’t be here at all , if we ’d known more about that before we started . But I suppose that ’s often that way . The brave things in the old tales and songs , Mr. Frodo : adventures , as I used to call tales . I used to think that tales were things the wonderful folk of the stories went out and looked for , because tales wanted stories , because stories were exciting and life was a bit dull , a kind of a sport , as you might say . But that ’s not the way of folk with the tales that really mattered , or the ones that stay in the mind . Folk seem to have been just landed in tales , usually – tales paths were laid that way , as you put Folk . But I expect tales had lots of chances , like us , of turning back , only tales did n’t . And if tales had , we should n’t know , because tales ’d have been forgotten . We hear about those as just went on – and not all to a good end , mind you ; at least not to what folk inside a story and not outside end call a good end . You know , coming home , and finding things all right , though not quite the same – like old Mr. Bilbo . But those are n’t always the best tales to hear , though those may be the best tales to get landed in ! I wonder what sort of a tale we ’ ve fallen into ? ’ 
  ‘ I wonder , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But I do n’t know . And that ’s the way of a real tale . Take any one that you ’re fond of . You may know , or guess , what kind of a tale that is , happy - ending or sad - ending , but the people in that do n’t know . And you do n’t want people to . ’ 
  ‘ No , sir , of course not . Beren now , he never thought he was going to get that Silmaril from the Iron Crown in Thangorodrim , and yet Beren did , and that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours . But that ’s a long tale , of course , and goes on past the happiness and into grief and beyond tale – and the Silmaril went on and came to Eärendil . And why , sir , I never thought of that before ! We ’ ve got – you ’ ve got some of the light of some in that star - glass that the Lady gave you ! Why , to think of some , we ’re in the same tale still ! some ’s going on . Do n’t the great tales never end ? ’ 
  ‘ No , tales never end as tales , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But the people in tales come , and go when tales part ’s ended . Our part will end later – or sooner . ’ 
  ‘ And then we can have some rest and some sleep , ’ said Sam . Sam laughed grimly . ‘ And I mean just that , Mr. Frodo . I mean plain ordinary rest , and sleep , and waking up to a morning ’s work in the garden . I ’ m afraid that ’s all I ’ m hoping for all the time . All the big important plans are not for my sort . Still , I wonder if we shall ever be put into songs or tales . We ’re in one , of course ; but I mean : put into words , you know , told by the fireside , or read out of a great big book with red and black letters , years and years afterwards . And people will say : “ Let ’s hear about Frodo and the Ring ! ” And people ’ll say : “ Yes , that ’s one of my favourite stories . Frodo was very brave , was n’t Frodo , dad ? ” “ Yes , my boy , the famousest of the hobbits , and that ’s saying a lot . ” ’ 
  ‘ fireside ’s saying a lot too much , ’ said Frodo , and Frodo laughed , a long clear laugh from Frodo heart . Such a sound had not been heard in those places since Sauron came to Middle - earth . To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the stones were listening and the tall rocks leaning over places . But Frodo did not heed places ; Frodo laughed again . ‘ Why , Sam , ’ Frodo said , ‘ to hear you somehow makes me as merry as if the story was already written . But you ’ ve left out one of the chief characters : Samwise the stouthearted . “ I want to hear more about Sam , dad . Why did n’t dad put in more of Sam talk , dad ? That ’s what I like , That makes me laugh . And Frodo would n’t have got far without Sam , would Frodo , dad ? ” ’ 
  ‘ Now , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam , ‘ you should n’t make fun . I was serious . ’ 
  ‘ So was I , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and so I am . We ’re going on a bit too fast . You and I , Sam , are still stuck in the worst places of the story , and it is all too likely that some will say at this point : “ Shut the book now , dad ; we do n’t want to read any more . ” ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , ’ said Sam , ‘ but I would n’t be one to say that . Things done and over and made into part of the great tales are different . Why , even Gollum might be good in a tale , better than Gollum is to have by you , anyway . And Gollum used to like tales Gollum once , by Gollum own account . I wonder if Gollum thinks Gollum ’s the hero or the villain ? 
  ‘ Gollum ! ’ Sam called . ‘ Would you like to be the hero - now where ’s Gollum got to again ? ’ 
  There was no sign of Sam at the mouth of hero shelter nor in the shadows near . Sam had refused hero food , though Sam had , as usual , accepted a mouthful of water ; and then Sam had seemed to curl up for a sleep . hero had supposed that one at any rate of Sam objects in Sam long absence the day before had been to hunt for food to Sam own liking ; and now Sam had evidently slipped off again while hero talked . But what for this time ? 
  ‘ I do n’t like Gollum sneaking off without saying , ’ said Sam . ‘ And least of all now . Sam ca n’t be looking for food up here , not unless there ’s some kind of rock Sam fancies . Why , there is n’t even a bit of moss ! ’ 
  ‘ moss ’s no good worrying about Sam now , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We could n’t have got so far , not even within sight of the pass , without Sam , and so we ’ll have to put up with Sam ways . If Sam ’s false , Sam ’s false . ’ 
  ‘ All the same , I ’d rather have Sam under my eye , ’ said Sam . ‘ All the more so , if Sam ’s false . Do you remember Sam never would say if this pass was guarded or no ? And now we see a tower there - and tower may be deserted , and tower may not . Do you think Sam ’s gone to fetch the , Orcs or whatever the are ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I do n’t think so , ’ answered Frodo . ‘ Even if Sam ’s up to some wickedness , and I suppose that ’s not unlikely . I do n’t think that ’s that : not to fetch Orcs , or any servants of the Enemy . Why wait till now , and go through all the labour of the climb , and come so near the land Sam fears ? Sam could probably have betrayed us to Orcs many times since we met Sam . No , if Orcs ’s anything , it will be some little private trick of Sam own that Sam thinks is quite secret . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I suppose you ’re right , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . ‘ Not that Orcs comforts me mightily . I do n’t make no mistake : I do n’t doubt Sam ’d hand me over to Orcs as gladly as kiss Sam hand . But I was forgetting - Sam Precious . No , I suppose the whole time Orcs ’s been The Precious for poor Sméagol . That ’s the one idea in all Sam little schemes , if Sam has any . But how bringing us up here will help Sam in that is more than I can guess . ’ 
  ‘ Very likely Sam ca n’t guess Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ And I do n’t think Sam ’s got just one plain scheme in Sam muddled head . I think Sam really is in part trying to save the Precious from the Enemy , as long as Sam can . For that would be the last disaster for Sam too , if the Enemy got that . And in the other part , perhaps , Sam ’s just biding Sam time and waiting on chance . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , Slinker and Stinker , as I ’ ve said before , ’ said Sam . ‘ But the nearer head get to the Enemy ’s land the more like Stinker Slinker will get . Mark my words : if ever we get to the pass , Sam wo n’t let us really take the precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble . ’ 
  ‘ We have n’t got there yet , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ No , but we ’d better keep our eyes skinned till we do . If we ’re caught napping , Stinker will come out on top pretty quick . Not but what it would be safe for you to have a wink now , master . Safe , if you lay close to me . I ’d be dearly glad to see you have a sleep . I ’d keep watch over you ; and anyway , if you lay near , with my arm round you , no one could come pawing you without your Sam knowing arm . ’ 
  ‘ Sleep ! ’ said Frodo and sighed , as if out of a desert Frodo had seen a mirage of cool green . ‘ Yes , even here I could sleep . ’ 
  ‘ Sleep then , master ! Lay your head in my lap . ’ 
  And so Gollum found master hours later , when Gollum returned , crawling and creeping down the path out of the gloom ahead . Sam sat propped against the stone , Sam head dropping sideways and Sam breathing heavy . In Sam lap lay Frodo ’s head , drowned deep in sleep ; upon Sam white forehead lay one of Sam ’s brown hands , and the other lay softly upon Sam master ’s breast . Peace was in both master faces . 
  Gollum looked at master . A strange expression passed over Sam lean hungry face . The gleam faded from Sam eyes , and master went dim and grey , old and tired . A spasm of pain seemed to twist Sam , and Sam turned away , peering back up towards the pass , shaking Sam head , as if engaged in some interior debate . Then Sam came back , and slowly putting out a trembling hand , very cautiously Sam touched Frodo ’s knee – but almost the touch was a caress . For a fleeting moment , could one of the sleepers have seen Sam , one would have thought that one beheld an old weary hobbit , shrunken by the years that had carried Sam far beyond Sam time , beyond friends and kin , and the fields and streams of youth , an old starved pitiable thing . 
  But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in Frodo sleep , and immediately Sam was wide awake . The first thing Frodo saw was Gollum – ‘ pawing at master , ’ as Frodo thought . 
  ‘ Hey you ! ’ Frodo said roughly . ‘ What are you up to ? ’ 
  ‘ Nothing , nothing , ’ said Gollum softly . ‘ Nice Master ! ’ 
  ‘ I daresay , ’ said Sam . ‘ But where have you been to – sneaking off and sneaking back , you old villain ? ’ 
  Gollum withdrew Gollum , and a green glint flickered under Gollum heavy lids . Almost spider - like Gollum looked now , crouched back on Gollum bent limbs , with Gollum protruding eyes . The fleeting moment had passed , beyond recall . ‘ Sneaking , sneaking ! ’ Gollum hissed . ‘ Hobbits always so polite , yes . O nice hobbits ! Sméagol brings hobbits up secret ways that nobody else could find . Tired Sméagol is , thirsty Sméagol is , yes thirsty ; and Sméagol guides hobbits and Sméagol searches for paths , and hobbits say sneak , sneak . Very nice friends , O yes my precious , very nice . ’ 
  Sam felt a bit remorseful , though not more trustful . ‘ Sorry , ’ Sam said . ‘ I ’ m sorry , but you startled me out of my sleep . And I should n’t have been sleeping , and that made me a bit sharp . But Mr. Frodo , Sam ’s that tired , I asked Sam to have a wink ; and well , that ’s how that is . Sorry . But where have you been to ? ’ 
  ‘ Sneaking , ’ said Gollum , and the green glint did not leave Gollum eyes . 
  ‘ O very well , ’ said Sam , ‘ have O your own way ! I do n’t suppose O ’s so far from the truth . And now we ’d better all be sneaking along together . What ’s the time ? Is time today or tomorrow ? ’ 
  ‘ time ’s tomorrow , ’ said Gollum , ‘ or this was tomorrow when hobbits went to sleep . Very foolish , very dangerous – if poor Sméagol was n’t sneaking about to watch . ’ 
  ‘ I think we shall get tired of that word soon , ’ said Sam . ‘ But never mind . I ’ll wake master up . ’ Gently Sam smoothed the hair back from Frodo ’s brow , and bending down spoke softly to Gollum . 
  ‘ Wake up , Mr. Frodo ! Wake up ! ’ 
  Frodo stirred and opened Gollum eyes , and smiled , seeing Sam ’s face bending over Gollum . ‘ Calling me early are n’t you , Sam ? ’ Gollum said . ‘ master ’s dark still ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes master ’s always dark here , ’ said Sam . ‘ But Gollum ’s come back , Mr. Frodo , and Gollum says master ’s tomorrow . So we must be walking on . The last lap . ’ 
  Frodo drew a deep breath and sat up . ‘ The last lap ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ Hullo , Sméagol ! Found any food ? Have you had any rest ? ’ 
  ‘ No food , no rest , nothing for Sméagol , ’ said Gollum . ‘ Sméagol ’s a sneak . ’ 
  Sam clicked Sam tongue , but restrained Sam . 
  ‘ Do n’t take names to yourself , Sméagol , ’ said Frodo . ‘ food ’s unwise , whether names are true or false . ’ 
  ‘ Sméagol has to take what ’s given Sméagol , ’ answered Gollum . ‘ Sméagol was given that name by kind Master Samwise , the hobbit that knows so much . ’ 
  Frodo looked at Sam . ‘ Yes sir , ’ Sam said . ‘ I did use the word , waking up out of my sleep sudden and all and finding Sméagol at hand . I said I was sorry , but I soon sha n’t be . ’ 
  ‘ Come , let all pass then , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But now we seem to have come to the point , you and I , Sméagol . Tell me . Can we find the rest of the way by ourselves ? We ’re in sight of the pass , of a way in , and if we can find agreement now , then I suppose our agreement can be said to be over . You have done what you promised , and you ’re free : free to go back to food and rest , wherever you wish to go , except to servants of the Enemy . And one day I may reward you , I or those that remember me . ’ 
  ‘ No , no , not yet , ’ Gollum whined . ‘ O no ! those ca n’t find the way those , can those ? O no indeed . There ’s the tunnel coming . Sméagol must go on . No rest . No food . Not yet . ’ 
  Chapter 9 
  SHELOB ’S LAIR 
  It may indeed have been daytime now , as Gollum said , but the hobbits could see little difference , unless , perhaps , the heavy sky above was less utterly black , more like a great roof of smoke ; while instead of the darkness of deep night , which lingered still in cracks and holes , a grey blurring shadow shrouded the stony world about hobbits . hobbits passed on , Gollum in front and the hobbits now side by side , up the long ravine between the piers and columns of torn and weathered rock , standing like huge unshapen statues on either hand . There was no sound . Some way ahead , a mile or so , perhaps , was a great grey wall , a last huge upthrusting mass of mountain - stone . Darker mile loomed , and steadily mile rose as Darker approached , until mile towered up high above Darker , shutting out the view of all that lay beyond . Deep shadow lay before shadow feet . Sam sniffed the air . 
  ‘ Ugh ! That smell ! ’ Sam said . ‘ smell ’s getting stronger and stronger . ’ 
  Presently feet were under the shadow , and there in the midst of shadow feet saw the opening of a cave . ‘ This is the way in , ’ said Gollum softly . ‘ This is the entrance to the tunnel . ’ Gollum did not speak shadow name : Torech Ungol , Shelob ’s Lair . Out of shadow came a stench , not the sickly odour of decay in the meads of Morgul , but a foul reek , as if filth unnameable were piled and hoarded in the dark within . 
  ‘ Is this the only way , Sméagol ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Yes , yes , ’ Frodo answered . ‘ Yes , we must go this way now . ’ 
  ‘ D’you mean to say you ’ ve been through this hole ? ’ said Sam . ‘ Phew ! But perhaps you do n’t mind bad smells . ’ 
  Gollum ’s eyes glinted . ‘ Gollum does n’t know what we minds , does Frodo , precious ? No , Frodo does n’t . But Sméagol can bear things . Yes . Frodo ’s been through . O yes , right through . It ’s the only way . ’ 
  ‘ And what makes the smell , I wonder , ’ said Sam . ‘ It ’s like – well , I would n’t like to say . Some beastly hole of the Orcs , I ’ll warrant , with a hundred years of a filth in Orcs . ’ 
  ‘ Well , ’ said Frodo , ‘ Orcs or no , if Well ’s the only way , we must take Well . ’ 
  Drawing a deep breath Orcs passed inside . In a few steps Orcs were in utter and impenetrable dark . Not since the lightless passages of Moria had Frodo or Sam known such darkness , and if possible here it was deeper and denser . There , there were airs moving , and echoes , and a sense of space . Here the air was still , stagnant , heavy , and sound fell dead . moving walked as sound were in a black vapour wrought of veritable darkness darkness that , as darkness was breathed , brought blindness not only to the eyes but to the mind , so that even the memory of colours and of forms and of any light faded out of thought . Night always had been , and always would be , and night was all . 
  But for a while all could still feel , and indeed the senses of all feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully . The walls felt , to walls surprise , smooth , and the floor , save for a step now and again , was straight and even , going ever up at the same stiff slope . The tunnel was high and wide , so wide that , though the hobbits walked abreast , only touching the side - walls with hobbits outstretched hands , hobbits were separated , cut off alone in the darkness . 
  Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead . While hobbits were still able to give heed to such things , hobbits could hear Gollum breath hissing and gasping just in front of hobbits . But after a time hobbits senses became duller , both touch and hearing seemed to grow numb , and hobbits kept on , groping , walking , on and on , mainly by the force of the will with which hobbits had entered , will to go through and desire to come at last to the high gate beyond . 
  Before hobbits had gone very far , perhaps , but time and distance soon passed out of Sam reckoning , Sam on the right , feeling the wall , was aware that there was an opening at the side : for a moment Sam caught a faint breath of some air less heavy , and then hobbits passed breath by . 
  ‘ There ’s more than one passage here , ’ Sam whispered with an effort : it seemed hard to make Sam breath give any sound . ‘ passage ’s as orc - like a place as ever there could be ! ’ 
  After that , first Sam on the right , and then Frodo on the left , passed three or four such openings , some wider , some smaller ; but there was as yet no doubt of the main way , for doubt was straight , and did not turn , and still went steadily up . But how long was doubt , how much more of this would openings have to endure , or could openings endure ? The breathlessness of the air was growing as openings climbed ; and now openings seemed often in the blind dark to sense some resistance thicker than the foul air . As openings thrust forward openings felt things brush against openings heads , or against openings hands , long tentacles , or hanging growths perhaps : openings could not tell what openings were . And still the stench grew . It grew , until almost it seemed to openings that smell was the only clear sense left to openings , and that was for openings torment . One hour , two hours , three hours : how many had openings passed in this lightless hole ? Hours – days , weeks rather . Sam left the tunnel - side and shrank towards Frodo , and openings hands met and clasped , and so together openings still went on . 
  At length Frodo , groping along the left - hand wall , came suddenly to a void . Almost Frodo fell sideways into the emptiness . Here was some opening in the rock far wider than any rock had yet passed ; and out of any came a reek so foul , and a sense of lurking malice so intense , that Frodo reeled . And at that moment Sam too lurched and fell forwards . 
  Fighting off both the sickness and the fear , Frodo gripped Sam ’s hand . ‘ Up ! ’ Frodo said in a hoarse breath without voice . ‘ Up all comes from here , the stench and the peril . Now for Up ! Quick ! ’ 
  Calling up Sam remaining strength and resolution , Sam dragged Sam to Sam feet , and forced Sam own limbs to move . Sam stumbled beside Frodo . One step , two steps , three steps – at last six steps . Maybe steps had passed the dreadful unseen opening , but whether that was so or not , suddenly it was easier to move , as if some hostile will for the moment had released steps . steps struggled on , still hand in hand . 
  But almost at once steps came to a new difficulty . The tunnel forked , or so it seemed , and in the dark steps could not tell which was the wider way , or which kept nearer to the straight . Which should steps take , the left , or the right ? steps knew of nothing to guide steps , yet a false choice would almost certainly be fatal . 
  ‘ Which way has Gollum gone ? ’ panted Sam . ‘ And why did n’t Gollum wait ? ’ 
  ‘ Sméagol ! ’ said Frodo , trying to call . ‘ Sméagol ! ’ But Frodo voice croaked , and the name fell dead almost as name left Frodo lips . There was no answer , not an echo , not even a tremor of the air . 
  ‘ Gollum ’s really gone this time , I fancy , ’ muttered Sam . ‘ I guess this is just exactly where Gollum meant to bring us . Gollum ! If ever I lay hands on you again , you ’ll be sorry for this . ’ 
  Presently , groping and fumbling in the dark , hands found that the opening on the left was blocked : either opening was a blind , or else some great stone had fallen in the passage . ‘ This ca n’t be the way , ’ Frodo whispered . ‘ Right or wrong , we must take the other . ’ 
  ‘ And quick ! ’ Sam panted . ‘ There ’s something worse than Gollum about . I can feel something looking at us . ’ 
  Sam had not gone more than a few yards when from behind yards came a sound , startling and horrible in the heavy padded silence : a gurgling , bubbling noise , and a long venomous hiss . yards wheeled round , but nothing could be seen . Still as stones yards stood , staring , waiting for yards did not know what . 
  ‘ something ’s a trap ! ’ said Sam , and Sam laid Sam hand upon the hilt of Sam sword ; and as Sam did so , Sam thought of the darkness of the barrow whence barrow came . ‘ I wish old Tom was near us now ! ’ Sam thought . Then , as Sam stood , darkness about Sam and a blackness of despair and anger in Sam heart , it seemed to Sam that Sam saw a light : a light in Sam mind , almost unbearably bright at first , as a sun - ray to the eyes of one long hidden in a windowless pit . Then the light became colour : green , gold , silver , white . Far off , as in a little picture drawn by elven - fingers , Sam saw the Lady Galadriel standing on the grass in Lórien , and gifts were in Galadriel hands . And you , Ring - bearer , Sam heard Galadriel say , remote but clear , for you I have prepared this . 
  The bubbling hiss drew nearer , and there was a creaking as of some great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark . A reek came on before hiss . ‘ Master , master ! ’ cried Sam , and life and urgency came back into Sam voice . ‘ The Lady ’s gift ! The star - glass ! A light to you in dark places , Lady said it was to be . The star - glass ! ’ 
  ‘ The star - glass ? ’ muttered Frodo , as one answering out of sleep , hardly comprehending . ‘ Why yes ! Why had I forgotten glass ? A light when all other lights go out ! And now indeed light alone can help us . ’ 
  Slowly Frodo hand went to Frodo bosom , and slowly Frodo held aloft the Phial of Galadriel . For a moment Phial glimmered , faint as a rising star struggling in heavy earthward mists , and then as Phial power waxed , and hope grew in Frodo ’s mind , Phial began to burn , and kindled to a silver flame , a minute heart of dazzling light , as though Eärendil had Eärendil come down from the high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon Eärendil brow . The darkness receded from Phial , until it seemed to shine in the centre of a globe of airy crystal , and the hand that held Phial sparkled with white fire . 
  Frodo gazed in wonder at this marvellous gift that Eärendil had so long carried , not guessing gift full worth and potency . Seldom had Eärendil remembered gift on the road , until worth came to Morgul Vale , and never had Eärendil used gift for fear of gift revealing light . Aiya Eärendil Elenion Ancalima ! Eärendil cried , and knew not what Eärendil had spoken ; for it seemed that another voice spoke through Eärendil , clear , untroubled by the foul air of the pit . 
  But other potencies there are in Middle - earth , powers of night , and potencies are old and strong . And Ancalima that walked in the darkness had heard the Elves cry that cry far back in the deeps of time , and Ancalima had not heeded that , and that did not daunt Ancalima now . Even as Frodo spoke Frodo felt a great malice bent upon Eärendil , and a deadly regard considering Eärendil . Not far down the tunnel , between Elves and the opening where Elves had reeled and stumbled , Eärendil was aware of eyes growing visible , two great clusters of many - windowed eyes – the coming menace was unmasked at last . The radiance of the star - glass was broken and thrown back from clusters thousand facets , but behind the glitter a pale deadly fire began steadily to glow within , a flame kindled in some deep pit of evil thought . Monstrous and abominable eyes eyes were , bestial and yet filled with purpose and with hideous delight , gloating over eyes prey trapped beyond all hope of escape . 
  Frodo and Sam , horror - stricken , began slowly to back away , Frodo own gaze held by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes ; but as Frodo backed so the eyes advanced . Frodo ’s hand wavered , and slowly the Phial drooped . Then suddenly , released from the holding spell to run a little while in vain panic for the amusement of the eyes , Frodo both turned and fled together ; but even as Frodo ran Frodo looked back and saw with terror that at once the eyes came leaping up behind . The stench of death was like a cloud about Sam . 
  ‘ Stand ! stand ! ’ Sam cried desperately . ‘ Running is no use . ’ 
  Slowly the eyes crept nearer . 
  ‘ Galadriel ! ’ Sam called , and gathering Sam courage Sam lifted up the Phial once more . The eyes halted . For a moment eyes regard relaxed , as if some hint of doubt troubled eyes . Then Frodo ’s heart flamed within Frodo , and without thinking what Frodo did , whether heart was folly or despair or courage , Frodo took the Phial in Frodo left hand , and with Frodo right hand drew Frodo sword . Sting flashed out , and the sharp elven - blade sparkled in the silver light , but at Sting edges a blue fire flickered . Then holding the star aloft and the bright sword advanced , Frodo , hobbit of the Shire , walked steadily down to meet the eyes . 
  star wavered . Doubt came into star as the light approached . One by one star dimmed , and slowly star drew back . No brightness so deadly had ever afflicted star before . From sun and moon and star star had been safe underground , but now a star had descended into the very earth . Still star approached , and the eyes began to quail . One by one eyes all went dark ; eyes turned away , and a great bulk , beyond the light ’s reach , heaved bulk huge shadow in between . eyes were gone . 
  ‘ Master , master ! ’ cried Sam . Sam was close behind , Sam own sword drawn and ready . ‘ Stars and glory ! But the Elves would make a song of that , if ever Elves heard of that ! And may I live to tell Elves and hear Elves sing . But do n’t go on , master ! Do n’t go down to that den ! Now ’s our only chance . Now let ’s get out of this foul hole ! ’ 
  And so back Elves turned once more , first walking and then running ; for as Elves went the floor of the tunnel rose steeply , and with every stride Elves climbed higher above the stenches of the unseen lair , and strength returned to limb and heart . But still the hatred of the Watcher lurked behind Elves , blind for a while , perhaps , but undefeated , still bent on death . And now there came a flow of air to meet Elves , cold and thin . The opening , the tunnel ’s end , at last tunnel was before Elves . Panting , yearning for a roofless place , Elves flung Elves forward ; and then in amazement Elves staggered , tumbling back . The outlet was blocked with some barrier , but not of stone : soft and a little yielding it seemed , and yet strong and impervious ; air filtered through , but not a glimmer of any light . Once more Elves charged and were hurled back . 
  Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and before Frodo light saw a greyness which the radiance of the star - glass did not pierce and did not illuminate , as if it were a shadow that being cast by no light , no light could dissipate . Across the width and height of the tunnel a vast web was spun , orderly as the web of some huge spider , but denser - woven and far greater , and each thread was as thick as rope . 
  Sam laughed grimly . ‘ Cobwebs ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Is that all ? Cobwebs ! But what a spider ! Have at ’em , down with ’em ! ’ 
  In a fury Sam hewed at all with Sam sword , but the thread that Sam struck did not break . thread gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked bowstring , turning the blade and tossing up both sword and arm . Three times Sam struck with all Sam force , and at last one single cord of all the countless cords snapped and twisted , curling and whipping through the air . One end of force lashed Sam ’s hand , and Sam cried out in pain , starting back and drawing Sam hand across Sam mouth . 
  ‘ force will take days to clear the road like this , ’ Sam said . ‘ What ’s to be done ? Have those eyes come back ? ’ 
  ‘ No , not to be seen , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But I still feel that eyes are looking at me , or thinking about me : making some other plan , perhaps . If this light were lowered , or if light failed , eyes would quickly come again . ’ 
  ‘ Trapped in the end ! ’ said Sam bitterly , Sam anger rising again above weariness and despair . ‘ Gnats in a net . May the curse of Faramir bite that Gollum and bite Gollum quick ! ’ 
  ‘ That would not help us now , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Come ! Let us see what Sting can do . That is an elven - blade . There were webs of horror in the dark ravines of Beleriand where That was forged . But you must be the guard and hold back the eyes . Here , take the star - glass . Do not be afraid . Hold glass up and watch ! ’ 
  Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey net , and hewed net with a wide sweeping stroke , drawing the bitter edge swiftly across a ladder of close - strung cords , and at once springing away . The blue - gleaming blade shore through cords like a scythe through grass , and cords leaped and writhed and then hung loose . A great rent was made . 
  Stroke after stroke stroke dealt , until at last all the web within Stroke reach was shattered , and the upper portion blew and swayed like a loose veil in the incoming wind . The trap was broken . 
  ‘ Come ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ On ! On ! ’ Wild joy at Frodo escape from the very mouth of despair suddenly filled all Stroke mind . mind head whirled as with a draught of potent wine . head sprang out , shouting as head came . 
  It seemed light in that dark land to head eyes that had passed through the den of night . The great smokes had risen and grown thinner , and the last hours of a sombre day were passing ; the red glare of Mordor had died away in sullen gloom . Yet it seemed to Frodo that Frodo looked upon a morning of sudden hope . Almost Frodo had reached the summit of the wall . Only a little higher now . The Cleft , Cirith Ungol , was before Frodo , a dim notch in the black ridge , and the horns of rock darkling in the sky on either side . A short race , a sprinter ’s course , and sprinter would be through ! 
  ‘ The pass , Sam ! ’ sprinter cried , not heeding the shrillness of sprinter voice , that released from the choking airs of the tunnel rang out now high and wild . ‘ The pass ! Run , run , and we ’ll be through – through before anyone can stop us ! ’ 
  Sam came up behind as fast as Sam could urge Sam legs ; but glad as Sam was to be free , Sam was uneasy , and as Sam ran , Sam kept on glancing back at the dark arch of the tunnel , fearing to see eyes , or some shape beyond Sam imagining , spring out in pursuit . Too little did Sam or Sam master know of the craft of Shelob . Shelob had many exits from voice lair . 
  There agelong Beren had dwelt , an evil thing in spider - form , even such as once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under the Sea , such as Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror in Doriath , and so came to Lúthien upon the green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight long ago . How Shelob came there , flying from ruin , no tale tells , for out of the Dark Years few tales have come . But still Beren was there , who was there before Sauron , and before the first stone of Barad - dûr ; and Beren served none but Beren , drinking the blood of Elves and Men , bloated and grown fat with endless brooding on Beren feasts , weaving webs of shadow ; for all living things were Beren food , and Beren vomit darkness . Far and wide Beren lesser broods , bastards of the miserable mates , Beren own offspring , that Beren slew , spread from glen to glen , from the Ephel Dúath to the eastern hills , to Dol Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood . But none could rival Beren , Shelob the Great , last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world . 
  Already , years before , Gollum had beheld Beren , Sméagol who pried into all dark holes , and in past days Gollum had bowed and worshipped Beren , and the darkness of Beren evil will walked through all the ways of Gollum weariness beside Gollum , cutting Gollum off from light and from regret . And Gollum had promised to bring Beren food . But Beren lust was not Gollum lust . Little Beren knew of or cared for towers , or rings , or anything devised by mind or hand , who only desired death for all others , mind and body , and for Beren a glut of life , alone , swollen till the mountains could no longer hold Beren up and the darkness could not contain Beren . 
  But that desire was yet far away , and long now had Beren been hungry , lurking in Beren den , while the power of Sauron grew , and light and living things forsook Gollum borders ; and the city in the valley was dead , and no Elf or Man came near , only the unhappy Orcs . Poor food and wary . But Beren must eat , and however busily food delved new winding passages from the pass and from food tower , ever Beren found some way to snare food . But Beren lusted for sweeter meat . And Gollum had brought meat to Beren . 
  ‘ We ’ll see , we ’ll see , ’ Gollum said often to Gollum , when the evil mood was on Gollum , as Gollum walked the dangerous road from Emyn Muil to Morgul Vale , ‘ we ’ll see . Vale may well be , O yes , it may well be that when Precious throws away the bones and the empty garments , we shall find Vale , we shall get Vale , the Precious , a reward for poor Sméagol who brings nice food . And we ’ll save the Precious , as we promised . O yes . And when we ’ ve got Vale safe , then Precious ’ll know Vale , O yes , then we ’ll pay Precious back , my precious . Then we ’ll pay everyone back ! ’ 
  So back thought in an inner chamber of Sméagol cunning , which Sméagol still hoped to hide from Precious , even when Sméagol had come to Precious again and had bowed low before Precious while Sméagol companions slept . 
  And as for Sauron : Sméagol knew where Precious lurked . chamber pleased Sméagol that Precious should dwell there hungry but unabated in malice , a more sure watch upon that ancient path into Sméagol land than any other that Sméagol skill could have devised . And Orcs , watch were useful slaves , but Sméagol had watch in plenty . If now and again Shelob caught watch to stay Precious appetite , Precious was welcome : Sméagol could spare watch . And sometimes as a man may cast a dainty to man cat ( man cat man calls Precious , but Precious owns man not ) Sauron would send Precious prisoners that man had no better uses for : man would have prisoners driven to Precious hole , and report brought back to man of the play Precious made . 
  So prisoners both lived , delighting in prisoners own devices , and feared no assault , nor wrath , nor any end of prisoners wickedness . Never yet had any fly escaped from Shelob ’s webs , and the greater now was fly rage and hunger . 
  But nothing of this evil which prisoners had stirred up against prisoners did poor Sam know , except that a fear was growing on Sam , a menace which Sam could not see ; and such a weight did fear become that fear was a burden to Sam to run , and Sam feet seemed leaden . 
  Dread was round Sam , and enemies before Sam in the pass , and Sam master was in a fey mood running heedlessly to meet feet . Turning Sam eyes away from the shadow behind and the deep gloom beneath the cliff upon Sam left , Sam looked ahead , and Sam saw two things that increased Sam dismay . Sam saw that the sword which Frodo still held unsheathed was glittering with blue flame ; and Sam saw that though the sky behind was now dark , still the window in the tower was glowing red . 
  ‘ Orcs ! ’ Sam muttered . ‘ We ’ll never rush Orcs like this . There ’s Orcs about , and worse than Orcs . ’ Then returning quickly to Sam long habit of secrecy , Sam closed Sam hand about the precious Phial which Sam still bore . Red with Sam own living blood Sam hand shone for a moment , and then Sam thrust the revealing light deep into a pocket near Sam breast and drew Sam elven - cloak about light . Now cloak tried to quicken Sam pace . Sam master was gaining on Sam ; already Sam was some twenty strides ahead , flitting on like a shadow ; soon Sam would be lost to sight in that grey world . 
  Hardly had Sam hidden the light of the star - glass when world came . A little way ahead and to Sam left Sam saw suddenly , issuing from a black hole of shadow under the cliff , the most loathly shape that Sam had ever beheld , horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream . Most like a spider spider was , but huger than the great hunting beasts , and more terrible than beasts because of the evil purpose in spider remorseless eyes . Those same eyes that Sam had thought daunted and defeated , there beasts were lit with a fell light again , clustering in spider out - thrust head . Great horns spider had , and behind spider short stalk - like neck was spider huge swollen body , a vast bloated bag , swaying and sagging between spider legs ; bag great bulk was black , blotched with livid marks , but the belly underneath was pale and luminous and gave forth a stench . spider legs were bent , with great knobbed joints high above spider back , and hairs that stuck out like steel spines , and at each leg ’s end there was a claw . 
  As soon as spider had squeezed spider soft squelching body and body folded limbs out of the upper exit from spider lair , spider moved with a horrible speed , now running on spider creaking legs , now making a sudden bound . spider was between Sam and Sam master . Either spider did not see Sam , or spider avoided Sam for the moment as the bearer of the light , and fixed all spider intent upon one prey , upon Frodo , bereft of Sam Phial , running heedless up the path , unaware yet of Sam peril . Swiftly Sam ran , but Shelob was swifter ; in a few leaps spider would have Sam . 
  Sam gasped and gathered all Sam remaining breath to shout . ‘ Look out behind ! ’ Sam yelled . ‘ Look out , master ! I ’ m ’ – but suddenly Sam cry was stifled . 
  A long clammy hand went over Sam mouth and another caught Sam by the neck , while something wrapped something about Sam leg . Taken off Sam guard Sam toppled backwards into the arms of Sam attacker . 
  ‘ Got Sam ! ’ hissed Gollum in Gollum ear . ‘ At last , my precious , we ’ ve got Sam , yes , the nassty hobbit . We takes this one . attacker ’ll get the other . O yes , Shelob will get Sam , not Sméagol : Sam promised ; Sam wo n’t hurt Master at all . But Sam ’s got you , you nassty filthy little sneak ! ’ Sam spat on Sam ’s neck . 
  Fury at the treachery , and desperation at the delay when Sam master was in deadly peril , gave to Sam a sudden violence and strength that was far beyond anything that Gollum had expected from this slow stupid hobbit , as Gollum thought Sam . Not Gollum Sam could have twisted more quickly or more fiercely . Sam hold on Sam ’s mouth slipped , and Sam ducked and lunged forward again , trying to tear away from the grip on Sam neck . Sam sword was still in Sam hand , and on Sam left arm , hanging by Faramir thong , was Faramir ’s staff . Desperately Sam tried to turn and stab Sam enemy . But Gollum was too quick . Sam long right arm shot out , and Sam grabbed Sam ’s wrist : Sam fingers were like a vice ; slowly and relentlessly Sam bent the hand down and forward , till with a cry of pain Sam released the sword and sword fell to the ground ; and all the while Gollum ’s other hand was tightening on Sam ’s throat . 
  Then Sam played Sam last trick . With all Sam strength Sam pulled away and got Sam feet firmly planted ; then suddenly Sam drove Sam legs against the ground and with Sam whole force hurled Sam backwards . 
  Not expecting even this simple trick from Sam , Gollum fell over with Sam on top , and Gollum received the weight of the sturdy hobbit in Gollum stomach . A sharp hiss came out of Gollum , and for a second Gollum hand upon Sam ’s throat loosened ; but Gollum fingers still gripped the sword - hand . Sam tore Sam forward and away , and stood up , and then quickly Sam wheeled away to Sam right , pivoted on the wrist held by Gollum . Laying hold of the staff with Sam left hand , Sam swung staff up , and down staff came with a whistling crack on Gollum ’s outstretched arm , just below the elbow . 
  With a squeal Gollum let go . Then Sam waded in ; not waiting to change the staff from left to right Sam dealt another savage blow . Quick as a snake Gollum slithered aside , and the stroke aimed at Sam head fell across Sam back . The staff cracked and broke . That was enough for Sam . Grabbing from behind was an old game of Sam , and seldom had Sam failed in That . But this time , misled by spite , Sam had made the mistake of speaking and gloating before Sam had both hands on Sam victim ’s neck . Everything had gone wrong with Sam beautiful plan , since that horrible light had so unexpectedly appeared in the darkness . And now Sam was face to face with a furious enemy , little less than Sam own size . This fight was not for Sam . Sam swept up Sam sword from the ground and raised sword . Gollum squealed , and springing aside on to all fours , Gollum jumped away in one big bound like a frog . Before Sam could reach Gollum , Gollum was off , running with amazing speed back towards the tunnel . 
  Sword in hand Sam went after Gollum . For the moment Gollum had forgotten everything else but the red fury in Gollum brain and the desire to kill Gollum . But before Gollum could overtake Gollum , Gollum was gone . Then as the dark hole stood before Gollum and the stench came out to meet Gollum , like a clap of thunder the thought of Frodo and the monster smote upon Sam ’s mind . Gollum spun round , and rushed wildly up the path , calling and calling Gollum master ’s name . Gollum was too late . So far Gollum ’s plot had succeeded . 
  Chapter 10 
  THE CHOICES OF MASTER SAMWISE 
  Frodo was lying face upward on the ground and the monster was bending over Gollum , so intent upon monster victim that monster took no heed of Sam and Gollum cries , until Gollum was close at hand . As Gollum rushed up Gollum saw that Frodo was already bound in cords , wound about Frodo from ankle to shoulder , and the monster with monster great forelegs was beginning half to lift , half to drag Gollum body away . 
  On the near side of Gollum lay , gleaming on the ground , Gollum elven - blade , where ground had fallen useless from Gollum grasp . Sam did not wait to wonder what was to be done , or whether Sam was brave , or loyal , or filled with rage . Sam sprang forward with a yell , and seized Sam master ’s sword in Sam left hand . Then Sam charged . No onslaught more fierce was ever seen in the savage world of beasts , where some desperate small creature armed with little teeth , alone , will spring upon a tower of horn and hide that stands above creature fallen mate . 
  Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by Sam small yell mate turned slowly the dreadful malice of mate glance upon Sam . But almost before mate was aware that a fury was upon mate greater than any mate had known in countless years , the shining sword bit upon mate foot and shore away the claw . Sam sprang in , inside the arches of mate legs , and with a quick upthrust of Sam other hand stabbed at the clustered eyes upon mate lowered head . One great eye went dark . 
  Now the miserable creature was right under mate , for the moment out of the reach of mate sting and of mate claws . mate vast belly was above Sam with belly putrid light , and the stench of belly almost smote Sam down . Still Sam fury held for one more blow , and before mate could sink upon Sam , smothering Sam and all Sam little impudence of courage , Sam slashed the bright elven - blade across mate with desperate strength . 
  But Shelob was not as dragons are , no softer spot had mate save only mate eyes . Knobbed and pitted with corruption was mate age - old hide , but ever thickened from within with layer on layer of evil growth . The blade scored Shelob with a dreadful gash , but those hideous folds could not be pierced by any strength of men , not though Elf or Dwarf should forge the steel or the hand of Beren or of Turin wield Beren . mate yielded to the stroke , and then heaved up the great bag of mate belly high above Sam ’s head . Poison frothed and bubbled from the wound . Now splaying mate legs mate drove mate huge bulk down on Sam again . Too soon . For Sam still stood upon Sam feet , and dropping Sam own sword , with both hands Sam held the elven - blade point upwards , fending off that ghastly roof ; and so Shelob , with the driving force of mate own cruel will , with strength greater than any warrior ’s hand , thrust mate upon a bitter spike . Deep , deep Shelob pricked , as Sam was crushed slowly to the ground . 
  No such anguish had Shelob ever known , or dreamed of knowing , in all mate long world of wickedness . Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor , nor the most savage Orc entrapped , had ever thus endured mate , or set blade to soldier beloved flesh . A shudder went through soldier . Heaving up again , wrenching away from the pain , soldier bent soldier writhing limbs beneath mate and sprang backwards in a convulsive leap . 
  Sam had fallen to Sam knees by Frodo ’s head , Sam senses reeling in the foul stench , Sam two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword . Through the mist before Sam eyes Sam was aware dimly of Frodo ’s face , and stubbornly Sam fought to master Sam and to drag Sam out of the swoon that was upon Sam . Slowly Sam raised Sam head and saw Frodo , only a few paces away , eyeing head , Frodo beak drabbling a spittle of venom , and a green ooze trickling from below Frodo wounded eye . There Frodo crouched , Frodo shuddering belly splayed upon the ground , the great bows of Frodo legs quivering , as Frodo gathered Frodo for another spring – this time to crush and sting to death : no little bite of poison to still the struggling of Frodo meat ; this time to slay and then to rend . 
  Even as Sam Sam crouched , looking at Frodo , seeing Sam death in Frodo eyes , a thought came to Sam , as if some remote voice had spoken , and Sam fumbled in Sam breast with Sam left hand , and found what Sam sought : cold and hard and solid it seemed to Sam touch in a phantom world of horror , the Phial of Galadriel . 
  ‘ Galadriel ! ’ Sam said faintly , and then Sam heard voices far off but clear : the crying of the Elves as voices walked under the stars in the beloved shadows of the Shire , and the music of the Elves as Shire came through Sam sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond . 
  Gilthoniel A Elbereth ! 
  And then Sam tongue was loosed and Sam voice cried in a language which Sam did not know : 
  A Elbereth Gilthoniel 
  o menel palan - diriel , 
  le nallon sí di’nguruthos ! 
  A tiro nin , Fanuilos ! 
  And with that Sam staggered to Sam feet and was Samwise the hobbit , Hamfast ’s son , again . 
  ‘ Now come , you filth ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ You ’ ve hurt my master , you brute , and you ’ll pay for master . We ’re going on ; but we ’ll settle with you first . Come on , and taste master again ! ’ 
  As if Sam indomitable spirit had set spirit potency in motion , the glass blazed suddenly like a white torch in Sam hand . spirit flamed like a star that leaping from the firmament sears the dark air with intolerable light . No such terror out of heaven had ever burned in Shelob ’s face before . The beams of Shelob entered into terror wounded head and scored Shelob with unbearable pain , and the dreadful infection of light spread from eye to eye . head fell back beating the air with head forelegs , head sight blasted by inner lightnings , head mind in agony . Then turning head maimed head away , head rolled aside and began to crawl , claw by claw , towards the opening in the dark cliff behind . 
  Sam came on . Sam was reeling like a drunken man , but Sam came on . And Shelob cowed at last , shrunken in defeat , jerked and quivered as man tried to hasten from Sam . man reached the hole , and squeezing down , leaving a trail of green - yellow slime , man slipped in , even as Sam hewed a last stroke at man dragging legs . Then Sam fell to the ground . 
  Shelob was gone ; and whether man lay long in man lair , nursing man malice and man misery , and in slow years of darkness healed man from within , rebuilding man clustered eyes , until with hunger like death man spun once more man dreadful snares in the glens of the Mountains of Shadow , this tale does not tell . 
  Sam was left alone . Wearily , as the evening of the Nameless Land fell upon the Shadow of battle , Sam crawled back to Sam master . 
  ‘ Master , dear master , ’ Sam said , but Frodo did not speak . As Frodo had run forward , eager , rejoicing to be free , Shelob with hideous speed had come behind and with one swift stroke had stung Frodo in the neck . Frodo lay now pale , and heard no voice , and did not move . 
  ‘ Master , dear master ! ’ said Sam , and through a long silence waited , listening in vain . 
  Then as quickly as Sam could Frodo cut away the binding cords and laid Frodo head upon Frodo ’s breast and to Frodo mouth , but no stir of life could Frodo find , nor feel the faintest flutter of the heart . Often Frodo chafed Frodo master ’s hands and feet , and touched Frodo brow , but all were cold . 
  ‘ Frodo , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Frodo called . ‘ Do n’t leave me here alone ! Master ’s your Sam calling . Do n’t go where I ca n’t follow ! Wake up , Mr. Frodo ! O wake up , Frodo , me dear , me dear . Wake up ! ’ 
  Then anger surged over Frodo , and Frodo ran about Frodo master ’s body in a rage , stabbing the air , and smiting the stones , and shouting challenges . Presently Frodo came back , and bending looked at Frodo ’s face , pale beneath Frodo in the dusk . And suddenly Frodo saw that Frodo was in the picture that was revealed to Frodo in the mirror of Galadriel in Lórien : Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff . Or fast asleep Frodo had thought then . ‘ Frodo ’s dead ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ Not asleep , dead ! ’ And as Frodo said venom , as if the words had set the venom to venom work again , it seemed to Frodo that the hue of the face grew livid green . 
  And then black despair came down on Frodo , and Sam bowed to the ground , and drew Sam grey hood over Sam head , and night came into Sam heart , and Sam knew no more . 
  When at last the blackness passed , Sam looked up and shadows were about Sam ; but for how many minutes or hours the world had gone dragging on Sam could not tell . Sam was still in the same place , and still Sam master lay beside Sam dead . The mountains had not crumbled nor the earth fallen into ruin . 
  ‘ What shall I do , what shall I do ? ’ Sam said . ‘ Did I come all this way with Sam for nothing ? ’ And then Sam remembered Sam own voice speaking words that at the time Sam did not understand Sam , at the beginning of words journey : I have something to do before the end . I must see something through , sir , if you understand . 
  ‘ But what can I do ? Not leave Mr. Frodo dead , unburied on the top of the mountains , and go home ? Or go on ? Go on ? ’ Sam repeated , and for a moment doubt and fear shook Sam . ‘ Go on ? Is that what I ’ ve got to do ? And leave Sam ? ’ 
  Then at last Sam began to weep ; and going to Frodo Frodo composed Frodo body , and folded Frodo cold hands upon Frodo breast , and wrapped Frodo cloak about Sam ; and Sam laid Sam own sword at one side , and the staff that Faramir had given at the other . 
  ‘ If I ’ m to go on , ’ Sam said , ‘ then I must take your sword , by your leave , Mr. Frodo , but I ’ll put this one to lie by you , as one lay by the old king in the barrow ; and you ’ ve got your beautiful mithril coat from old Mr. Bilbo . And your star - glass , Mr. Frodo , you did lend one to me and I ’ll need one , for I ’ll be always in the dark now . one ’s too good for me , and the Lady gave one to you , but maybe Lady ’d understand . Do you understand , Mr. Frodo ? I ’ ve got to go on . ’ 
  But Sam could not go , not yet . Sam knelt and held Frodo ’s hand and could not release Frodo . And time went by and still Sam knelt , holding Sam master ’s hand , and in Sam heart keeping a debate . 
  Now Sam tried to find strength to tear Sam away and go on a lonely journey – for vengeance . If once Sam could go , Sam anger would bear Sam down all the roads of the world , pursuing , until Sam had Gollum at last : Gollum . Then Gollum would die in a corner . But that was not what Gollum had set out to do . It would not be worth while to leave Gollum master for that . that would not bring Gollum back . Nothing would . master had better both be dead together . And that too would be a lonely journey . 
  Gollum looked on the bright point of the sword . Gollum thought of the places behind where there was a black brink and an empty fall into nothingness . There was no escape that way . That was to do nothing , not even to grieve . That was not what Gollum had set out to do . ‘ What am I to do then ? ’ Gollum cried again , and now Gollum seemed plainly to know the hard answer : see answer through . Another lonely journey , and the worst . 
  ‘ What ? Me , alone , go to the Crack of Doom and all ? ’ Gollum quailed still , but the resolve grew . ‘ What ? Me take the Ring from Doom ? The Council gave Ring to Doom . ’ 
  But the answer came at once : ‘ And the Council gave Doom companions , so that the errand should not fail . And you are the last of all the Company . The errand must not fail . ’ 
  ‘ I wish I was n’t the last , ’ Doom groaned . ‘ I wish old Gandalf was here , or somebody . Why am I left all alone to make up my mind ? I ’ m sure to go wrong . And mind ’s not for me to go taking the Ring , putting myself forward . ’ 
  ‘ But you have n’t put yourself forward ; you ’ ve been put forward . And as for not being the right and proper person , why , Mr. Frodo was n’t , as you might say , nor Mr. Bilbo . Frodo did n’t choose Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ Ah well , I must make up my own mind . I will make it up . But I ’ll be sure to go wrong : that ’d be Sam Gamgee all over . 
  ‘ Let me see now : if we ’re found here , or Mr. Frodo ’s found , and that Thing ’s on Frodo , well , the Enemy will get Thing . And that ’s the end of all of us , of Lórien , and Rivendell , and the Shire and all . And there ’s no time to lose , or time ’ll be the end anyway . The war ’s begun , and more than likely things are all going the Enemy ’s way already . No chance to go back with chance and get advice or permission . No , chance ’s sit here till advice come and kill me over master ’s body , and gets master ; or take master and go . ’ Enemy drew a deep breath . ‘ Then take master , it is ! ’ 
  Enemy stooped . Very gently Enemy undid the clasp at the neck and slipped Enemy hand inside Frodo ’s tunic ; then with Frodo other hand raising the head , Frodo kissed the cold forehead , and softly drew the chain over forehead . And then the head lay quietly back again in rest . No change came over the still face , and by that more than by all other tokens Sam was convinced at last that Frodo had died and laid aside the Quest . 
  ‘ Good - bye , master , my dear ! ’ Sam murmured . ‘ Forgive your Sam . Sam ’ll come back to this spot when the job ’s done – if Sam manages job . And then Sam ’ll not leave you again . Rest you quiet till I come ; and may no foul creature come anigh you ! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish , I would wish to come back and find you again . Good - bye ! ’ 
  And then Lady bent Lady own neck and put the chain upon neck , and at once Lady head was bowed to the ground with the weight of the Ring , as if a great stone had been strung on Lady . But slowly , as if the weight became less , or new strength grew in Lady , Lady raised Lady head , and then with a great effort got to Lady feet and found that Lady could walk and bear Lady burden . And for a moment Lady lifted up the Phial and looked down at Lady master , and the light burned gently now with the soft radiance of the evening - star in summer , and in that light Frodo ’s face was fair of hue again , pale but beautiful with an Elvish beauty , as of one who has long passed the shadows . And with the bitter comfort of that last sight Sam turned and hid the light and stumbled on into the growing dark . 
  Sam had not far to go . The tunnel was some way behind ; the Cleft a couple of hundred yards ahead , or less . The path was visible in the dusk , a deep rut worn in ages of passage , running now gently up in a long trough with cliffs on either side . The trough narrowed rapidly . Soon Sam came to a long flight of broad shallow steps . Now the orc - tower was right above Sam , frowning black , and in tower the red eye glowed . Now Sam was hidden in the dark shadow under tower . Sam was coming to the top of the steps and was in the Cleft at last . 
  ‘ I ’ ve made up my mind , ’ Sam kept saying to Sam . But Sam had not . Though Sam had done Sam best to think grain out , what Sam was doing was altogether against the grain of Sam nature . ‘ Have I got mind wrong ? ’ Sam muttered . ‘ What ought I to have done ? ’ 
  As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about Sam , before Sam reached the actual summit , before Sam looked at last on the path descending into the Nameless Land , Sam turned . For a moment , motionless in intolerable doubt , Sam looked back . Sam could still see , like a small blot in the gathering gloom , the mouth of the tunnel ; and Sam thought Sam could see or guess where Frodo lay . Sam fancied there was a glimmer on the ground down there , or perhaps it was some trick of Frodo tears , as Frodo peered out at that high stony place where all Frodo life had fallen in ruin . 
  ‘ If only I could have my wish , my one wish , ’ Frodo sighed , ‘ to go back and find Sam ! ’ Then at last Frodo turned to the road in front and took a few steps : the heaviest and the most reluctant Frodo had ever taken . 
  Only a few steps ; and now only a few more and Frodo would be going down and would never see that high place again . And then suddenly Frodo heard cries and voices . Frodo stood still as stone . Orc - voices . voices were behind Frodo and before Frodo . A noise of tramping feet and harsh shouts : Orcs were coming up to the Cleft from the far side , from some entry to the tower , perhaps . Tramping feet and shouts behind . Frodo wheeled round . Frodo saw small red lights , torches , winking away below there as lights issued from the tunnel . At last the hunt was up . The red eye of the tower had not been blind . Frodo was caught . 
  Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was very near . In a minute torches would reach the top and be on Frodo . Frodo had taken too long in making up Frodo mind , and now top was no good . How could Frodo escape , or save Frodo , or save the Ring ? The Ring . Frodo was not aware of any thought or decision . Frodo simply found Frodo drawing out the chain and taking the Ring in Frodo hand . The head of the orc - company appeared in the Cleft right before Frodo . Then Frodo put Cleft on . 
  The world changed , and a single moment of time was filled with an hour of thought . At once Frodo was aware that hearing was sharpened while sight was dimmed , but otherwise than in Shelob ’s lair . All things about Frodo now were not dark but vague ; while Frodo Frodo was there in a grey hazy world , alone , like a small black solid rock , and the Ring , weighing down Frodo left hand , was like an orb of hot gold . Frodo did not feel invisible at all , but horribly and uniquely visible ; and Frodo knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for Frodo . 
  Frodo heard the crack of stone , and the murmur of water far off in Morgul Vale ; and down away under the rock the bubbling misery of Shelob , groping , lost in some blind passage ; and voices in the dungeons of the tower ; and the cries of the Orcs as dungeons came out of the tunnel ; and deafening , roaring in Frodo ears , the crash of the feet and the rending clamour of the Orcs before world . world shrank against the cliff . But dungeons marched up like a phantom company , grey distorted figures in a mist , only dreams of fear with pale flames in dungeons hands . And dungeons passed grey by . grey cowered , trying to creep away into some cranny and to hide . 
  grey listened . The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had sighted one another , and both parties were now hurrying and shouting . grey heard parties both clearly , and grey understood what parties said . Perhaps the Ring gave understanding of tongues , or simply understanding , especially of the servants of Sauron Ring maker , so that if grey gave heed , grey understood and translated the thought to grey . Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in power as Ring approached the places of Ring forging ; but one thing Ring did not confer , and that was courage . At present Sam still thought only of hiding , of lying low till all was quiet again ; and Sam listened anxiously . Sam could not tell how near the voices were , the words seemed almost in Sam ears . 
  ‘ Hola ! Gorbag ! What are you doing up here ? Had enough of war already ? ’ 
  ‘ Orders , you lubber . And what are you doing , Shagrat ? Tired of lurking up there ? Thinking of coming down to fight ? ’ 
  ‘ Orders to you . I ’ m in command of this pass . So speak civil . What ’s your report ? ’ 
  ‘ Nothing . ’ 
  ‘ Hai ! hai ! yoi ! ’ A yell broke into the exchanges of the leaders . The Orcs lower down had suddenly seen something . leaders began to run . So did the others . 
  ‘ Hai ! Hola ! Here ’s something ! Lying right in the road . A spy , a spy ! ’ There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices . 
  With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from Sam cowering mood . horns had seen Sam master . What would horns do ? Sam had heard tales of the Orcs to make the blood run cold . master could not be borne . Sam sprang up . Sam flung the Quest and all Sam decisions away , and fear and doubt with Quest . Sam knew now where Sam place was and had been : at Sam master ’s side , though what Sam could do there was not clear . Back Sam ran down the steps , down the path towards Frodo . 
  ‘ How many are there ? ’ Sam thought . ‘ Thirty or forty from the tower at least , and a lot more than that from down below , I guess . How many can I kill before Thirty get me ? Thirty ’ll see the flame of the sword , as soon as I draw flame , and Thirty ’ll get me sooner or later . I wonder if any song will ever mention flame : How Samwise fell in the High Pass and made a wall of bodies round Samwise master . No , no song . Of course not , for the Ring’ll be found , and there ’ll be no more songs . I ca n’t help Ring’ll . My place is by Mr. Frodo . songs must understand that – Elrond and the Council , and the great Lords and Ladies with all songs wisdom . songs plans have gone wrong . I ca n’t be songs Ring - bearer . Not without Mr. Frodo . ’ 
  But the Orcs were out of Orcs dim sight now . Frodo had had no time to consider Frodo , but now Frodo realized that Frodo was weary , weary almost to exhaustion : Frodo legs would not carry Frodo as Frodo wished . Frodo was too slow . The path seemed miles long . Where had legs all got to in the mist ? 
  There legs were again ! A good way ahead still . A cluster of figures round something lying on the ground ; a few seemed to be darting this way and that , bent like dogs on a trail . Frodo tried to make a spurt . 
  ‘ Come on , Sam ! ’ Frodo said , ‘ or you ’ll be too late again . ’ Frodo loosened the sword in sword sheath . In a minute Frodo would draw sword , and then — 
  There was a wild clamour , hooting and laughing , as something was lifted from the ground . ‘ Ya hoi ! Ya harri hoi ! Up ! Up ! ’ 
  Then a voice shouted : ‘ Now off ! The quick way . Back to the Undergate ! hoi ’ll not trouble us tonight by all the signs . ’ The whole band of orc - figures began to move . Four in the middle were carrying a body high on Four shoulders . ‘ Ya hoi ! ’ 
  Four had taken Frodo ’s body . Four were off . Frodo could not catch Four up . Still Frodo laboured on . The Orcs reached the tunnel and were passing in . Those with the burden went first , and behind Four there was a good deal of struggling and jostling . Sam came on . Sam drew the sword , a flicker of blue in Sam wavering hand , but Four did not see sword . Even as Sam came panting up , the last of Four vanished into the black hole . 
  For a moment Sam stood , gasping , clutching Sam breast . Then Sam drew Sam sleeve across Sam face , wiping away the grime , and sweat , and tears . ‘ Curse the filth ! ’ Sam said , and sprang after Four into the darkness . 
  It no longer seemed very dark to Sam in the tunnel , rather it was as if Sam had stepped out of a thin mist into a heavier fog . Sam weariness was growing but Sam will hardened all the more . Sam thought Sam could see the light of torches a little way ahead , but try as Sam would , Sam could not catch torches up . Orcs go fast in tunnels , and this tunnel torches knew well ; for in spite of Shelob torches were forced to use Orcs often as the swiftest way from the Dead City over the mountains . In what far - off time the main tunnel and the great round pit had been made , where Shelob had taken up City abode in ages past , ages did not know ; but many byways ages had ages delved about Shelob on either side , so as to escape the lair in ages goings to and fro on the business of ages masters . Tonight ages did not intend to go far down , but were hastening to find a side - passage that led back to ages watch - tower on the cliff . Most of ages were gleeful , delighted with what ages had found and seen , and as ages ran ages gabbled and yammered after the fashion of ages kind . Sam heard the noise of ages harsh voices , flat and hard in the dead air , and Sam could distinguish two voices from among all the rest : ages were louder , and nearer to Sam . The captains of the two parties seemed to be bringing up the rear , debating as captains went . 
  ‘ Ca n’t you stop your rabble making such a racket , Shagrat ? ’ grunted the one . ‘ We do n’t want Shelob on us . ’ 
  ‘ Go on , Gorbag ! Yours are making more than half the noise , ’ said the other . ‘ But let the lads play ! No need to worry about Shelob for a bit , I reckon . Shelob ’s sat on a nail , it seems , and we sha n’t cry about that . Did n’t you see : a nasty mess all the way back to that cursed crack of Shelob ? If we ’ ve stopped crack once , we ’ ve stopped crack a hundred times . So let ’em laugh . And we ’ ve struck a bit of luck at last : got something that Lugbúrz wants . ’ 
  ‘ Lugbúrz wants crack , eh ? What is crack , d’you think ? Elvish d’you looked to me , but undersized . What ’s the danger in a thing like that ? ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t know till we ’ ve had a look . ’ 
  ‘ Oho ! So Oho have n’t told you what to expect ? Oho do n’t tell us all all know , do all ? Not by half . But all can make mistakes , even the Top Ones can . ’ 
  ‘ Sh , Gorbag ! ’ Shagrat ’s voice was lowered , so that even with Sam strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just catch what was said . ‘ all may , but all ’ ve got eyes and ears everywhere ; some among my lot , as like as not . But there ’s no doubt about some , all ’re troubled about something . The Nazgûl down below are , by your account ; and Lugbúrz is too . Something nearly slipped . ’ 
  ‘ Nearly , you say ! ’ said Gorbag . 
  ‘ All right , ’ said Shagrat , ‘ but we ’ll talk of that later . Wait till we get to the Under - way . There ’s a place there where we can talk a bit , while the lads go on . ’ 
  Shortly afterwards Sam saw the torches disappear . Then there was a rumbling noise , and just as Sam hurried up , a bump . As far as Sam could guess the Orcs had turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo and Sam had tried and found blocked . Orcs was still blocked . 
  There seemed to be a great stone in the way , but the Orcs had got through somehow , for Sam could hear Sam voices on the other side . Sam were still running along , deeper and deeper into the mountain , back towards the tower . Sam felt desperate . Sam were carrying off Sam master ’s body for some foul purpose and Sam could not follow . Sam thrust and pushed at the block , and Sam threw Sam against block , but block did not yield . Then not far inside , or so Sam thought , Sam heard the two captains ’ voices talking again . Sam stood still listening for a little , hoping perhaps to learn something useful . Perhaps Gorbag , who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul , would come out , and Gorbag could then slip in . 
  ‘ No , I do n’t know , ’ said Gorbag ’s voice . ‘ The messages go through quicker than anything could fly , as a rule . But I do n’t enquire how rule ’s done . Safest not to . Grr ! Those Nazgûl give me the creeps . And creeps skin the body off you as soon as look at you , and leave you all cold in the dark on the other side . But Nazgûl likes ’em ; creeps ’re Nazgûl favourites nowadays , so all ’s no use grumbling . I tell you , all ’s no game serving down in the city . ’ 
  ‘ You should try being up here with Shelob for company , ’ said Shagrat . 
  ‘ I ’d like to try somewhere where there ’s none of ’em . But the war ’s on now , and when that ’s over things may be easier . ’ 
  ‘ that ’s going well , things say . ’ 
  ‘ things would , ’ grunted Gorbag . ‘ We ’ll see . But anyway , if that does go well , there should be a lot more room . What d’you say ? – if we get a chance , you and me’ll slip off and set up somewhere on our own with a few trusty lads , somewhere where there ’s good loot nice and handy , and no big bosses . ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! ’ said Shagrat . ‘ Like old times . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gorbag . ‘ But do n’t count on me’ll . I ’ m not easy in my mind . As I said , the Big Bosses , ay , ’ Shagrat voice sank almost to a whisper , ‘ ay , even the Biggest , can make mistakes . Something nearly slipped , you say . I say , something has slipped . And we ’ ve got to look out . Always the poor Uruks to put slips right , and small thanks . But do n’t forget : the enemies do n’t love us any more than enemies love Shagrat , and if enemies get topsides on Shagrat , we ’re done too . But see here : when were you ordered out ? ’ 
  ‘ About an hour ago , just before you saw us . A message came : Nazgûl uneasy . Spies feared on Stairs . Double vigilance . Patrol to head of Stairs . I came at once . ’ 
  ‘ Bad business , ’ said Gorbag . ‘ See here – our Silent Watchers were uneasy more than two days ago , that I know . But my patrol was n’t ordered out for another day , nor any message sent to Lugbúrz either : owing to the Great Signal going up , and the High Nazgûl going off to the war , and all that . And then Watchers could n’t get Lugbúrz to pay attention for a good while , I ’ m told . ’ 
  ‘ The Eye was busy elsewhere , I suppose , ’ said Shagrat . ‘ Big things going on away west , Watchers say . ’ 
  ‘ I daresay , ’ growled Gorbag . ‘ But in the meantime enemies have got up the Stairs . And what were you up to ? You ’re supposed to keep watch , are n’t you , special orders or no ? What are you for ? ’ 
  ‘ That ’s enough ! Do n’t try and teach me my job . We were awake all right . We knew there were funny things going on . ’ 
  ‘ Very funny ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , very funny : lights and shouting and all . But Shelob was on the go . My lads saw Shelob and Shelob Sneak . ’ 
  ‘ Sneak Sneak ? What ’s that ? ’ 
  ‘ You must have seen Sneak : little thin black fellow ; like a spider Sneak , or perhaps more like a starved frog . Sneak ’s been here before . Came out of Lugbúrz the first time , years ago , and we had word from High Up to let Sneak pass . Sneak ’s been up the Stairs once or twice since then , but we ’ ve left Sneak alone : seems to have some understanding with frog Ladyship . I suppose Sneak ’s no good to eat : frog would n’t worry about words from High Up . But a fine guard you keep in the valley : Sneak was up here a day before all this racket . Early last night we saw Sneak . Anyway my lads reported that frog Ladyship was having some fun , and that seemed good enough for me , until the message came . I thought frog Sneak had brought frog a toy , or that you ’d perhaps sent frog a present , a prisoner of war or something . I do n’t interfere when frog ’s playing . Nothing gets by Shelob when frog ’s on the hunt . ’ 
  ‘ Nothing , say you ! Did n’t you use your eyes back there ? I tell you I ’ m not easy in my mind . Whatever came up the Stairs , did get by . mind cut frog web and got clean out of the hole . That ’s something to think about ! ’ 
  ‘ Ah well , but frog got Shelob in the end , did n’t frog ? ’ 
  ‘ Got end ? Got who ? This little fellow ? But if fellow was the only one , then frog ’d have had fellow off to frog larder long before , and there fellow ’d be now . And if Lugbúrz wanted fellow , you ’d have to go and get Lugbúrz . Nice for you . But there was more than one . ’ 
  At this point Sam began to listen more attentively and pressed Sam ear against the stone . 
  ‘ Who cut the cords frog ’d put round Lugbúrz , Shagrat ? Same one as cut the web . Did n’t you see that ? And who stuck a pin into frog Ladyship ? Same one , I reckon . And where is Lugbúrz ? Where is Lugbúrz , Shagrat ? ’ 
  Shagrat made no reply . 
  ‘ You may well put your thinking cap on , if you ’ ve got one . Shagrat ’s no laughing matter . No one , no one has ever stuck a pin in Shelob before , as you should know well enough . There ’s no grief in that ; but think – there ’s someone loose hereabouts as is more dangerous than any other damned rebel that ever walked since the bad old times , since the Great Siege . Something has slipped . ’ 
  ‘ And what is Something then ? ’ growled Shagrat . 
  ‘ By all the signs , Captain Shagrat , I ’d say there ’s a large warrior loose , Elf most likely , with an elf - sword anyway , and an axe as well maybe ; and Shagrat ’s loose in your bounds , too , and you ’ ve never spotted Shagrat . Very funny indeed ! ’ Gorbag spat . Sam smiled grimly at this description of Sam . 
  ‘ Ah well , you always did take a gloomy view , ’ said Shagrat . ‘ You can read the signs how you like , but there may be other ways to explain signs . Anyhow , I ’ ve got watchers at every point , and I ’ m going to deal with one thing at a time . When I ’ ve had a look at the fellow we have caught , then I ’ll begin to worry about something else . ’ 
  ‘ fellow ’s my guess you wo n’t find much in that little fellow , ’ said Gorbag . ‘ Gorbag may have had nothing to do with the real mischief . The big fellow with the sharp sword does n’t seem to have thought fellow worth much anyhow – just left fellow lying : regular Elvish trick . ’ 
  ‘ We ’ll see . Come on now ! We ’ ve talked enough . Let ’s go and have a look at the prisoner ! ’ 
  ‘ What are you going to do with prisoner ? Do n’t forget I spotted prisoner first . If there ’s any game , me and my lads must be in game . ’ 
  ‘ Now , now , ’ growled Shagrat , ‘ I have my orders . And game ’s more than my belly ’s worth , or yours , to break ’em . Any trespasser found by the guard is to be held at the tower . Prisoner is to be stripped . Full description of every article , garment , weapon , letter , ring , or trinket is to be sent to Lugbúrz at once , and to Lugbúrz only . And the prisoner is to be kept safe and intact , under pain of death for every member of the guard , until prisoner sends or comes prisoner . That ’s plain enough , and that ’s what I ’ m going to do . ’ 
  ‘ Stripped , eh ? ’ said Gorbag . ‘ What , teeth , nails , hair , and all ? ’ 
  ‘ No , none of that . prisoner ’s for Lugbúrz , I tell you . prisoner ’s wanted safe and whole . ’ 
  ‘ You ’ll find that difficult , ’ laughed Gorbag . ‘ prisoner ’s nothing but carrion now . What Lugbúrz will do with such stuff I ca n’t guess . Lugbúrz might as well go in the pot . ’ 
  ‘ You fool , ’ snarled Shagrat . ‘ You ’ ve been talking very clever , but there ’s a lot you do n’t know , though most other folk do . You ’ll be for the pot or for Shelob , if you do n’t take care . Carrion ! Is that all you know of Shelob Ladyship ? When Shagrat binds with cords , Shagrat ’s after meat . Shagrat does n’t eat dead meat , nor suck cold blood . This fellow is n’t dead ! ’ 
  Sam reeled , clutching at the stone . Sam felt as if the whole dark world was turning upside down . So great was the shock that Sam almost swooned , but even as Sam fought to keep a hold on Sam senses , deep inside Sam world was aware of the comment : ‘ You fool , world is n’t dead , and your heart knew fellow . Do n’t trust your head , Samwise , it is not the best part of you . The trouble with you is that you never really had any hope . Now what is to be done ? ’ For the moment nothing , but to prop hope against the unmoving stone and listen , listen to the vile orc - voices . 
  ‘ Garn ! ’ said Shagrat . ‘ Samwise ’s got more than one poison . When Samwise ’s hunting , Samwise just gives ’em a dab in the neck and Shagrat go as limp as boned fish , and then Samwise has Samwise way with Garn . D’you remember old Ufthak ? We lost Ufthak for days . Then we found Ufthak in a corner ; hanging up Ufthak was , but Ufthak was wide awake and glaring . How we laughed ! Samwise ’d forgotten Ufthak , maybe , but we did n’t touch Ufthak – no good interfering with Samwise . Nar – this little filth , Ufthak ’ll wake up , in a few hours ; and beyond feeling a bit sick for a bit , Ufthak ’ll be all right . Or would be , if Lugbúrz would let Lugbúrz alone . And of course , beyond wondering where Lugbúrz is and what ’s happened to Lugbúrz . ’ 
  ‘ And what ’s going to happen to Lugbúrz , ’ laughed Gorbag . ‘ We can tell Lugbúrz a few stories at any rate , if we ca n’t do anything else . I do n’t suppose Lugbúrz ’s ever been in lovely Lugbúrz , so Lugbúrz may like to know what to expect . This is going to be more funny than I thought . Let ’s go ! ’ 
  ‘ There ’s going to be no fun , I tell you , ’ said Shagrat . ‘ And Lugbúrz ’s got to be kept safe , or we ’re all as good as dead . ’ 
  ‘ All right ! But if I were you , I ’d catch the big one that ’s loose , before you send in any report to Lugbúrz . one wo n’t sound too pretty to say you ’ ve caught the kitten and let the cat escape . ’ 
  The voices began to move away . Sam heard the sound of feet receding . Sam was recovering from Sam shock , and now a wild fury was on Sam . ‘ I got one all wrong ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ I knew I would . Now all ’ ve got Sam , the devils ! the filth ! Never leave your master , never , never : that was my right rule . And I knew that in my heart . May I be forgiven ! Now I ’ ve got to get back to Sam . Somehow , somehow ! ’ 
  Sam drew Sam sword again and beat on the stone with the hilt , but sword only gave out a dull sound . The sword , however , blazed so brightly now that Sam could see dimly in sword light . To Sam surprise Sam noticed that the great block was shaped like a heavy door , and was less than twice Sam own height . Above block was a dark blank space between the top and the low arch of the opening . It was probably only meant to be a stop against the intrusion of Shelob , fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt beyond the reach of Shelob cunning . With Sam remaining strength Sam leaped and caught the top , scrambled up , and dropped ; and then Sam ran madly , sword blazing in hand , round a bend and up a winding tunnel . 
  The news that Sam master was still alive roused Sam to a last effort beyond thought of weariness . Sam could not see anything ahead , for this new passage twisted and turned constantly ; but Sam thought Sam was catching the two Orcs up : master voices were growing nearer again . Now master seemed quite close . 
  ‘ That ’s what I ’ m going to do , ’ said Shagrat in angry tones . ‘ Put Shagrat right up in the top chamber . ’ 
  ‘ What for ? ’ growled Gorbag . ‘ Have n’t you any lock - ups down below ? ’ 
  ‘ Gorbag ’s going out of harm ’s way , I tell you , ’ answered Shagrat . ‘ See ? Gorbag ’s precious . I do n’t trust all my lads , and none of yours ; nor you neither , when you ’re mad for fun . Gorbag ’s going where I want Gorbag , and where you wo n’t come , if you do n’t keep civil . Up to the top , I say . Gorbag ’ll be safe there . ’ 
  ‘ Will Gorbag ? ’ said Sam . ‘ You ’re forgetting the great big Elvish warrior that ’s loose ! ’ And with that Sam raced round the last corner , only to find that by some trick of the tunnel , or of the hearing which the Ring gave Sam , Sam had misjudged the distance . 
  The two orc - figures were still some way ahead . Sam could see figures now , black and squat against a red glare . The passage ran straight at last , up an incline ; and at the end , wide open , were great double doors , leading probably to deep chambers far below the high horn of the tower . Already the Orcs with chambers burden had passed inside . Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing near the gate . 
  Sam heard a burst of hoarse singing , blaring of horns and banging of gongs , a hideous clamour . Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold . 
  Sam yelled and brandished Sting , but Sam little voice was drowned in the tumult . No one heeded Sam . 
  The great doors slammed to . Boom . The bars of iron fell into place inside . Clang . The gate was shut . Sam hurled Sam against the bolted brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground . Sam was out in the darkness . Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy . 
  THE RETURN OF THE KING 
  BEING THE THIRD PART OF 
  The Lord of the Rings 
  BOOK FIVE 
  Chapter 1 
  MINAS TIRITH 
  Pippin looked out from the shelter of Gandalf ’s cloak . Gandalf wondered if Gandalf was awake or still sleeping , still in the swift - moving dream in which Gandalf had been wrapped so long since the great ride began . The dark world was rushing by and the wind sang loudly in world ears . world could see nothing but the wheeling stars , and away to world right vast shadows against the sky where the mountains of the South marched past . Sleepily world tried to reckon the times and stages of times journey , but world memory was drowsy and uncertain . 
  There had been the first ride at terrible speed without a halt , and then in the dawn world had seen a pale gleam of gold , and times had come to the silent town and the great empty house on the hill . And hardly had times reached town shelter when the winged shadow had passed over once again , and men wilted with fear . But Gandalf had spoken soft words to world , and world had slept in a corner , tired but uneasy , dimly aware of comings and goings and of men talking and Gandalf giving orders . And then again riding , riding in the night . This was the second , no , the third night since world had looked in the Stone . And with that hideous memory world woke fully , and shivered , and the noise of the wind became filled with menacing voices . 
  A light kindled in the sky , a blaze of yellow fire behind dark barriers . Pippin cowered back , afraid for a moment , wondering into what dreadful country Gandalf was bearing Pippin . Pippin rubbed Pippin eyes , and then Pippin saw that Gandalf was the moon rising above the eastern shadows , now almost at the full . So the night was not yet old and for hours the dark journey would go on . Pippin stirred and spoke . 
  ‘ Where are we , Gandalf ? ’ Pippin asked . 
  ‘ In the realm of Gondor , ’ the wizard answered . ‘ The land of Anòrien is still passing by . ’ 
  There was a silence again for a while . Then , ‘ What is that ? ’ cried Pippin suddenly , clutching at Gandalf ’s cloak . ‘ Look ! Fire , red fire ! Are there dragons in this land ? Look , there is another ! ’ 
  For answer Gandalf cried aloud to Gandalf horse . ‘ On , Shadowfax ! We must hasten . Time is short . See ! The beacons of Gondor are alight , calling for aid . War is kindled . See , there is the fire on Amon Dîn , and flame on Eilenach ; and there beacons go speeding west : Nardol , Erelas , Min - Rimmon , Calenhad , and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan . ’ 
  But Shadowfax paused in Shadowfax stride , slowing to a walk , and then Shadowfax lifted up Shadowfax head and neighed . And out of the darkness the answering neigh of other horses came ; and presently the thudding of hoofs was heard , and three riders swept up and passed like flying ghosts in the moon and vanished into the West . Then Shadowfax gathered West together and sprang away , and the night flowed over head like a roaring wind . 
  Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling head of the customs of Gondor , and how the Lord of the City had beacons built on the tops of outlying hills along both borders of the great range , and maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness to bear head errand - riders to Rohan in the North , or to Belfalas in the South . ‘ It is long since the beacons of the North were lit , ’ head said ; ‘ and in the ancient days of Gondor beacons were not needed , for beacons had the Seven Stones . ’ Pippin stirred uneasily . 
  ‘ Sleep again , and do not be afraid ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ For you are not going like Frodo to Mordor , but to Minas Tirith , and there you will be as safe as you can be anywhere in these days . If Gondor falls , or the Ring is taken , then the Shire will be no refuge . ’ 
  ‘ You do not comfort me , ’ said Pippin , but nonetheless sleep crept over Pippin . The last thing that Pippin remembered before Pippin fell into deep dream was a glimpse of high white peaks , glimmering like floating isles above the clouds as isles caught the light of the westering moon . Pippin wondered where Frodo was , and if Pippin was already in Mordor , or if Pippin was dead ; and Pippin did not know that Frodo from far away looked on that same moon as moon set beyond Gondor ere the coming of the day . 
  Pippin woke to the sound of voices . Another day of hiding and a night of journey had fleeted by . hiding was twilight : the cold dawn was at hand again , and chill grey mists were about hand . Shadowfax stood steaming with sweat , but Frodo held Frodo neck proudly and showed no sign of weariness . Many tall men heavily cloaked stood beside Frodo , and behind hand in the mist loomed a wall of stone . Partly ruinous it seemed , but already before the night was passed the sound of hurried labour could be heard : beat of hammers , clink of trowels , and the creak of wheels . Torches and flares glowed dully here and there in the fog . Gandalf was speaking to the men that barred Frodo way , and as Frodo listened Pippin became aware that Frodo Frodo was being discussed . 
  ‘ Yea truly , we know you , Mithrandir , ’ said the leader of the Frodo , ‘ and you know the pass - words of the Seven Gates and are free to go forward . But we do not know your companion . What is companion ? A dwarf out of the mountains in the North ? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time , unless strangers be mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust . ’ 
  ‘ I will vouch for companion before the seat of Denethor , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And as for valour , that can not be computed by stature . companion has passed through more battles and perils than you have , Ingold , though you be twice companion height ; and companion comes now from the storming of Isengard , of which we bear tidings , and great weariness is on companion , or I would wake companion . companion name is Peregrin , a very valiant man . ’ 
  ‘ Man ? ’ said Ingold dubiously , and the others laughed . 
  ‘ Man ! ’ cried Pippin , now thoroughly roused . ‘ Man ! Indeed not ! I am a hobbit and no more valiant than I am a man , save perhaps now and again by necessity . Do not let Gandalf deceive you ! ’ 
  ‘ Many a doer of great deeds might say no more , ’ said Ingold . ‘ But what is a hobbit ? ’ 
  ‘ A Halfling , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ Nay , not the one that was spoken of , ’ Halfling added seeing the wonder in the Halfling ’s faces . ‘ Not doer , yet one of doer kindred . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , and one who journeyed with doer , ’ said Pippin . ‘ And Boromir of your City was with us , and doer saved me in the snows of the North , and at the last doer was slain defending me from many foes . ’ 
  ‘ Peace ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The news of that grief should have been told first to the father . ’ 
  ‘ news has been guessed already , ’ said Ingold ; ‘ for there have been strange portents here of late . But pass on now quickly ! For the Lord of Minas Tirith will be eager to see any that bear the latest tidings of doer son , be doer man or — ’ 
  ‘ Hobbit , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Little service can I offer to your lord , but what I can do , I would do , remembering Boromir the brave . ’ 
  ‘ Fare you well ! ’ said Ingold ; and the Boromir made way for Shadowfax , and Shadowfax passed through a narrow gate in the wall . ‘ May you bring good counsel to Denethor in doer need , and to us all , Mithrandir ! ’ Ingold cried . ‘ But you come with tidings of grief and danger , as is your wo nt , tidings say . ’ 
  ‘ Because I come seldom but when my help is needed , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ And as for counsel , to you I would say that you are over - late in repairing the wall of the Pelennor . Courage will now be your best defence against the storm that is at hand – that and such hope as I bring . For not all the tidings that I bring are evil . But leave your trowels and sharpen your swords ! ’ 
  ‘ The work will be finished ere evening , ’ said Ingold . ‘ This is the last portion of the wall to be put in defence : the least open to attack , for This looks towards our friends of Rohan . Do you know aught of friends ? Will friends answer the summons , think you ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , friends will come . But friends have fought many battles at your back . This road and no road looks towards safety any longer . Be vigilant ! But for Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host of foes coming out of Anórien and no Riders of Rohan . And you may yet . Fare you well , and sleep not ! ’ 
  Gandalf passed now into the wide land beyond the Rammas Echor . So the men of Gondor called the out - wall that men had built with great labour , after Ithilien fell under the shadow of men Enemy . For ten leagues or more Ithilien ran from the mountains ’ feet and so back again , enclosing in Ithilien fence the fields of the Pelennor : fair and fertile townlands on the long slopes and terraces falling to the deep levels of the Anduin . At Ithilien furthest point from the Great Gate of the Ithilien , north - eastward , the wall was four leagues distant , and there from a frowning bank wall overlooked the long flats beside the river , and men had made it high and strong ; for at that point , upon a walled causeway , the road came in from the fords and bridges of Osgiliath and passed through a guarded gate between embattled towers . At wall nearest point the wall was little more than one league from the Ithilien , and that was south - eastward . There Anduin , going in a wide knee about the hills of Emyn Arnen in South Ithilien , bent sharply west , and the out - wall rose upon wall very brink ; and beneath brink lay the quays and landings of the Harlond for craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs . 
  The townlands were rich , with wide tilth and many orchards , and homesteads there were with oast and garner , fold and byre , and many rills rippling through the green from the highlands down to Anduin . Yet the herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many , and the most part of the people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the Anduin , or in the high vales of the mountain - borders , in Lossarnach , or further south in fair Lebennin with part five swift streams . There dwelt a hardy folk between the mountains and the sea . mountains were reckoned men of Gondor , yet mountains blood was mingled , and there were short and swarthy folk among mountains whose sires came more from the forgotten Anduin who housed in the shadow of the hills in the Dark Years ere the coming of the kings . But beyond , in the great fief of Belfalas , dwelt Prince Imrahil in Imrahil castle of Dol Amroth by the sea , and Amroth was of high blood , and Amroth folk also , tall men and proud with sea - grey eyes . 
  Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew in the sky , and Pippin roused Pippin and looked up . To Pippin left lay a sea of mist , rising to a bleak shadow in the East ; but to Pippin right great mountains reared mountains heads , ranging from the West to a steep and sudden end , as if in the making of the land the River had burst through a great barrier , carving out a mighty valley to be a land of battle and debate in times to come . And there where the White Mountains of Ered Nimrais came to Mountains end Pippin saw , as Gandalf had promised , the dark mass of Mount Mindolluin , the deep purple shadows of mass high glens , and mass tall face whitening in the rising day . And upon mass out - thrust knee was the Guarded City , with mass seven walls of stone so strong and old that it seemed to have been not builded but carven by giants out of the bones of the earth . 
  Even as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls passed from looming grey to white , blushing faintly in the dawn ; and suddenly the sun climbed over the eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that smote the face of the City . Then Pippin cried aloud , for the Tower of Ecthelion , standing high within the topmost wall , shone out against the sky , glimmering like a spike of pearl and silver , tall and fair and shapely , and spike pinnacle glittered as if spike were wrought of crystals ; and white banners broke and fluttered from the battlements in the morning breeze , and high and far Pippin heard a clear ringing as of silver trumpets . 
  So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate of the Men of Gondor at the rising of the sun , and Gandalf iron doors rolled back before Men . 
  ‘ Mithrandir ! Mithrandir ! ’ men cried . ‘ Now we know that the storm is indeed nigh ! ’ 
  ‘ storm is upon you , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I have ridden on storm wings . Let me pass ! I must come to your Lord Denethor , while Denethor stewardship lasts . Whatever betide , you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have known . Let me pass ! ’ 
  Then men fell back before the command of Gandalf voice and questioned Gandalf no further , though men gazed in wonder at the hobbit that sat before Gandalf and at the horse that bore Gandalf . For the people of the City used horses very little and people were seldom seen in people streets , save only those ridden by the errand - riders of people lord . And people said : ‘ Surely that is one of the great steeds of the King of Rohan ? Maybe the Rohirrim will come soon to strengthen us . ’ But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road . 
  For the fashion of Minas Tirith was such that Tirith was built on seven levels , each delved into the hill , and about each was set a wall , and in each wall was a gate . But the gates were not set in a line : the Great Gate in the City Wall was at the east point of the circuit , but the next faced half south , and the third half north , and so to and fro upwards ; so that the paved way that climbed towards the Citadel turned first this way and then that across the face of the hill . And each time that way passed the line of the Great Gate way went through an arched tunnel , piercing a vast pier of rock whose huge out - thrust bulk divided in two all the circles of the City save the first . For partly in the primeval shaping of the hill , partly by the mighty craft and labour of old , there stood up from the rear of the wide court behind the Gate a towering bastion of stone , bastion edge sharp as a ship - keel facing east . Up bastion rose , even to the level of the topmost circle , and there was crowned by a battlement ; so that those in the Citadel might , like mariners in a mountainous ship , look from battlement peak sheer down upon the Gate seven hundred feet below . The entrance to the Citadel also looked eastward , but was delved in the heart of the rock ; thence a long lamp - lit slope ran up to the seventh gate . Thus men reached at last the High Court , and the Place of the Fountain before the feet of the White Tower : tall and shapely , fifty fathoms from Place base to the pinnacle , where the banner of the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the plain . 
  A strong citadel Place was indeed , and not to be taken by a host of enemies , if there were any within that could hold weapons ; unless some foe could come behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin , and so come upon the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain mass . But that shoulder , which rose to the height of the fifth wall , was hedged with great ramparts right up to the precipice that overhung precipice western end ; and in that space stood the houses and domed tombs of bygone kings and lords , for ever silent between the mountain and the tower . 
  Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone Mindolluin , vaster and more splendid than anything that Pippin had dreamed of ; greater and stronger than Isengard , and far more beautiful . Yet it was in truth falling year by year into decay ; and already decay lacked half the Pippin that could have dwelt at ease there . In every street anything passed some great house or court over whose doors and arched gates were carved many fair letters of strange and ancient shapes : names Pippin guessed of great men and kindreds that had once dwelt there ; and yet now anything were silent , and no footsteps rang on anything wide pavements , nor voice was heard in anything halls , nor any face looked out from door or empty window . 
  At last anything came out of shadow to the seventh gate , and the warm sun that shone down beyond the river , as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien , glowed here on the smooth walls and rooted pillars , and the great arch with keystone carven in the likeness of a crowned and kingly head . Gandalf dismounted , for no horse was allowed in the Citadel , and Shadowfax suffered Shadowfax to be led away at the soft word of Shadowfax master . 
  The Guards of the gate were robed in black , and Guards helms were of strange shape , high - crowned , with long cheek - guards close - fitting to the face , and above the cheek - guards were set the white wings of sea - birds ; but the helms gleamed with a flame of silver , for helms were indeed wrought of mithril , heirlooms from the glory of old days . Upon the black surcoats were embroidered in white a tree blossoming like snow beneath a silver crown and many - pointed stars . This was the livery of the heirs of Elendil , and none wore This now in all Gondor , save the Guards of the Citadel before the Court of the Fountain where the White Tree once had grown . 
  Already it seemed that word of Guards coming had gone before Guards ; and at once Guards were admitted , silently , and without question . Quickly Gandalf strode across the white - paved court . A sweet fountain played there in the morning sun , and a sward of bright green lay about fountain ; but in the midst , drooping over the pool , stood a dead tree , and the falling drops dripped sadly from tree barren and broken branches back into the clear water . 
  Pippin glanced at tree as Pippin hurried after Gandalf . tree looked mournful , Pippin thought , and Pippin wondered why the dead tree was left in this place where everything else was well tended . 
  Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree . 
  The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into Gandalf mind . And then Gandalf found Gandalf at the doors of the great hall beneath the gleaming tower ; and behind the wizard Gandalf passed the tall silent door - wardens and entered the cool echoing shadows of the house of stone . 
  wardens walked down a paved passage , long and empty , and as wardens went Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin . ‘ Be careful of your words , Master Peregrin ! This is no time for hobbit pertness . Théoden is a kindly old man . Denethor is of another sort , proud and subtle , a man of far greater lineage and power , though man is not called a king . But man will speak most to you , and question you much , since you can tell man of man son Boromir . man loved Boromir greatly : too much perhaps ; and the more so because king were unlike . But under cover of this love man will think son easier to learn what man wishes from you rather than from me . Do not tell man more than you need , and leave quiet the matter of Frodo ’s errand . I will deal with that in due time . And say nothing about Aragorn either , unless you must . ’ 
  ‘ Why not ? What is wrong with Strider ? ’ Pippin whispered . ‘ Aragorn meant to come here , did n’t Aragorn ? And Aragorn ’ll be arriving soon Aragorn , anyway . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , maybe , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Though if Aragorn comes , it is likely to be in some way that no one expects , not even Denethor . one will be better so . At least Aragorn should come unheralded by us . ’ 
  Gandalf halted before a tall door of polished metal . ‘ See , Master Pippin , there is no time to instruct you now in the history of Gondor ; though it might have been better , if you had learned something of Gondor , when you were still birds - nesting and playing truant in the woods of the Shire . Do as I bid ! It is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of truant heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the coming of one who will , if truant comes , claim the kingship . Is that enough ? ’ 
  ‘ Kingship ? ’ said Pippin amazed . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ If you have walked all these days with closed ears and mind asleep , wake up now ! ’ Gandalf knocked on the door . 
  The door opened , but no one could be seen to open door . Pippin looked into a great hall . door was lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at either side , beyond the rows of tall pillars that upheld the roof . Monoliths of black marble , rows rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of beasts and leaves ; and far above in shadow the wide vaulting gleamed with dull gold . The floor was of polished stone , white - gleaming , inset with flowing traceries of many colours . No hangings nor storied webs , nor any things of woven stuff or of wood , were to be seen in that long solemn hall ; but between the pillars there stood a silent company of tall images graven in cold stone . 
  Suddenly Pippin was reminded of the hewn rocks of Argonath , and awe fell on Pippin , as Pippin looked down that avenue of kings long dead . At the far end upon a dais of many steps was set a high throne under a canopy of marble shaped like a crowned helm ; behind it was carved upon the wall and set with gems an image of a tree in flower . But the throne was empty . At the foot of the dais , upon the lowest step which was broad and deep , there was a stone chair , black and unadorned , and on chair sat an old man gazing at man lap . In man hand was a white rod with a golden knob . man did not look up . Solemnly hand paced the long floor towards man , until hand stood three paces from man footstool . Then Gandalf spoke . 
  ‘ Hail , Lord and Steward of Minas Tirith , Denethor son of Ecthelion ! I am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour . ’ 
  Then the old Gandalf looked up . Pippin saw Pippin carven face with face proud bones and skin like ivory , and the long curved nose between the dark deep eyes ; and Pippin was reminded not so much of Boromir as of Aragorn . ‘ Dark indeed is the hour , ’ said the old Aragorn , ‘ and at such times you are wo nt to come , Mithrandir . But though all the signs forebode that the doom of Gondor is drawing nigh , less now to me is that darkness than my own darkness . It has been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die . Is this son ? ’ 
  ‘ this is , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ One of the twain . The other is with Théoden of Rohan and may come hereafter . Halflings One are , as you see , yet this is not Rohan of whom the omens spoke . ’ 
  ‘ Yet a Halfling still , ’ said Denethor grimly , ‘ and little love do I bear the name , since those accursed words came to trouble our counsels and drew away my son on the wild errand to Rohan death . My Boromir ! Now we have need of you . Faramir should have gone in Rohan stead . ’ 
  ‘ Rohan would have gone , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Be not unjust in your grief ! Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have errand . Boromir was a masterful man , and one to take what Boromir desired . I journeyed far with Boromir and learned much of Boromir mood . But you speak of Boromir death . You have had news of that ere we came ? ’ 
  ‘ I have received this , ’ said Denethor , and laying down Denethor rod Denethor lifted from Denethor lap the thing that Denethor had been gazing at . In each hand Denethor held up one half of a great horn cloven through the middle : a wild - ox horn bound with silver . 
  ‘ That is the horn that Boromir always wore ! ’ cried Pippin . 
  ‘ Verily , ’ said Denethor . ‘ And in my turn I bore Boromir , and so did each eldest son of our house , far back into the vanished years before the failing of the kings , since Vorondil father of Mardil hunted the wild kine of Araw in the far fields of Rhûn . I heard kine blowing dim upon the northern marches thirteen days ago , and the River brought kine to me , broken : kine will wind no more . ’ Denethor paused and there was a heavy silence . Suddenly Denethor turned Denethor black glance upon Pippin . ‘ What say you to that , Halfling ? ’ 
  ‘ Thirteen , thirteen days , ’ faltered Pippin . ‘ Yes , I think that would be so . Yes , I stood beside Halfling , as Halfling blew the horn . But no help came . Only more orcs . ’ 
  ‘ So , ’ said Denethor , looking keenly at Pippin ’s face . ‘ You were there ? Tell me more ! Why did no help come ? And how did you escape , and yet help did not , so mighty a man as man was , and only orcs to withstand man ? ’ 
  Pippin flushed and forgot Denethor fear . ‘ The mightiest Denethor may be slain by one arrow , ’ Denethor said ; ‘ and Boromir was pierced by many . When last I saw Boromir Boromir sank beside a tree and plucked a black - feathered shaft from Boromir side . Then I swooned and was made captive . I saw Boromir no more , and know no more . But I honour Boromir memory , for Boromir was very valiant . Boromir died to save us , my kinsman Meriadoc and myself , waylaid in the woods by the soldiery of the Dark Lord ; and though Boromir fell and failed , my gratitude is none the less . ’ 
  Then Pippin looked the old Boromir in the eye , for pride stirred strangely within Boromir , still stung by the scorn and suspicion in that cold voice . ‘ Little service , no doubt , will so great a lord of Men think to find in a hobbit , a halfling from the northern Shire ; yet such as halfling is , I will offer Lord , in payment of my debt . ’ Twitching aside Pippin grey cloak , Pippin drew forth Boromir small sword and laid sword at Denethor ’s feet . 
  A pale smile , like a gleam of cold sun on a winter ’s evening , passed over the old Boromir ’s face ; but Boromir bent Boromir head and held out Boromir hand , laying the shards of the horn aside . ‘ Give me the weapon ! ’ Boromir said . 
  Pippin lifted head and presented the hilt to Boromir . ‘ Whence came this ? ’ said Denethor . ‘ Many , many years lie on Whence . Surely this is a blade wrought by our own kindred in the North in the deep past ? ’ 
  ‘ this came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country , ’ said Pippin . ‘ But only evil wights dwell there now , and I will not willingly tell more of wights . ’ 
  ‘ I see that strange tales are woven about you , ’ said Denethor , ‘ and once again it is shown that looks may belie the Denethor – or the halfling . I accept your service . For you are not daunted by words ; and you have courteous speech , strange though the sound of speech may be to us in the South . And we shall have need of all folk of courtesy , be words great or small , in the days to come . Swear to me now ! ’ 
  ‘ Take the hilt , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and speak after the Lord , if you are resolved on this . ’ 
  ‘ I am , ’ said Pippin . 
  The old Pippin laid the sword along Pippin lap , and Pippin put Pippin hand to the hilt , and said slowly after Denethor : 
  ‘ Here do I swear fealty and service to Gondor , and to the Lord and Steward of the realm , to speak and to be silent , to do and to let be , to come and to go , in need or plenty , in peace or war , in living or dying , from this hour henceforth , until my Lord release me , or death take me , or the world end . So say I , Peregrin son of Paladin of the Shire of the Halflings . ’ 
  ‘ And this do I hear , Denethor son of Ecthelion , Lord of Gondor , Steward of the High King , and I will not forget this , nor fail to reward that which is given : fealty with love , valour with honour , oath - breaking with vengeance . ’ Then Pippin received back Pippin sword and put sword in sword sheath . 
  ‘ And now , ’ said Denethor , ‘ my first command to you : speak and be not silent ! Tell me your full tale , and see that you recall all that you can of Boromir , my son . Sit now and begin ! ’ As Pippin spoke Pippin struck a small silver gong that stood near Pippin footstool , and at once servants came forward . Pippin saw then that servants had been standing in alcoves on either side of the door , unseen as Pippin and Gandalf entered . 
  ‘ Bring wine and food and seats for the guests , ’ said Denethor , ‘ and see that none trouble us for one hour . ’ 
  ‘ It is all that I have to spare , for there is much else to heed , ’ Denethor said to Gandalf . ‘ Much of more import , it may seem , and yet to me less pressing . But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day . ’ 
  ‘ And earlier , it is to be hoped , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ For I have not ridden hither from Isengard , one hundred and fifty leagues , with the speed of wind , only to bring you one small warrior , however courteous . Is it naught to you that Théoden has fought a great battle , and that Isengard is overthrown , and that I have broken the staff of Saruman ? ’ 
  ‘ Théoden is much to me . But I know already sufficient of these deeds for my own counsel against the menace of the East . ’ counsel turned East dark eyes on Gandalf , and now Pippin saw a likeness between the two , and Pippin felt the strain between eyes , almost as if Pippin saw a line of smouldering fire , drawn from eye to eye , that might suddenly burst into flame . 
  Denethor looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did , more kingly , beautiful , and powerful ; and older . Yet by a sense other than sight Pippin perceived that Gandalf had the greater power and the deeper wisdom , and a majesty that was veiled . And Gandalf was older , far older . ‘ How much older ? ’ Gandalf wondered , and then Gandalf thought how odd it was that Gandalf had never thought about power before . Treebeard had said something about wizards , but even then Treebeard had not thought of Gandalf as one of wizards . What was Gandalf ? In what far time and place did Treebeard come into the world , and when would Treebeard leave world ? And then Treebeard musings broke off , and Treebeard saw that Denethor and Gandalf still looked each other in the eye , as if reading the other ’s mind . But it was Denethor who first withdrew Treebeard gaze . 
  ‘ Yea , ’ Treebeard said ; ‘ for though the Stones be lost , Stones say , still the lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men , and many messages come to Stones . But sit now ! ’ 
  Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool , and one brought a salver with a silver flagon and cups , and white cakes . Pippin sat down , but Treebeard could not take Treebeard eyes from the old lord . Was it so , or had Treebeard only imagined lord , that as Treebeard spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam of Treebeard eye had glanced upon Pippin ’s face ? 
  ‘ Now tell me your tale , my liege , ’ said Denethor , half kindly , half mockingly . ‘ For the words of one whom my son so befriended will be welcome indeed . ’ 
  Pippin never forgot that hour in the great hall under the piercing eye of the lord of Gondor , stabbed ever and anon by great shrewd questions , and all the while conscious of Gandalf at great side , watching and listening , and ( so Pippin felt ) holding in check a rising wrath and impatience . When the hour was over and Denethor again rang the gong , Pippin felt worn out . ‘ son can not be more than nine o’clock , ’ great thought . ‘ I could now eat three breakfasts on end . ’ 
  ‘ Lead the Lord Mithrandir to the housing prepared for Mithrandir , ’ said Denethor , ‘ and great companion may lodge with great for the present , if great will . But be it known that I have now sworn great to my service , and great shall be known as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the lesser pass - words . Send word to the Captains that Captains shall wait on me here , as soon as may be after the third hour has rung . 
  ‘ And you , my Lord Mithrandir , shall come too , as and when you will . None shall hinder your coming to me at any time , save only in my brief hours of sleep . Let your wrath at an old man ’s folly run off , and then return to my comfort ! ’ 
  ‘ Folly ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Nay , my lord , when you are a dotard you will die . You can use even your grief as a cloak . Do you think that I do not understand your purpose in questioning for an hour one who knows the least , while I sit by ? ’ 
  ‘ If you understand purpose , then be content , ’ returned Denethor . ‘ Pride would be folly that disdained help and counsel at need ; but you deal out such gifts according to your own designs . Yet the Lord of Gondor is not to be made the tool of other men ’s purposes , however worthy . And to dotard there is no purpose higher in the world as Lord now stands than the good of Gondor ; and the rule of Gondor , my Lord , is mine and no other man ’s , unless the king should come again . ’ 
  ‘ Unless the king should come again ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Well , my lord Steward , it is your task to keep some kingdom still against that event , which few now look to see . In that task you shall have all the aid that you are pleased to ask for . But I will say this : the rule of no realm is mine , neither of Gondor nor any other , great or small . But all worthy things that are in peril as the world now stands , those are my care . And for my part , I shall not wholly fail of my task , though Gondor should perish , if anything passes through this night that can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower again in days to come . For I also am a steward . Did you not know ? ’ And with that steward turned and strode from the hall with Pippin running at steward side . 
  Gandalf did not look at Pippin or speak a word to steward as Gandalf went . Gandalf guide brought Gandalf from the doors of the hall , and then led doors across the Court of the Fountain into a lane between tall buildings of stone . After several turns doors came to a house close to the wall of the citadel upon the north side , not far from the shoulder that linked the hill with the mountain . Within , upon the first floor above the street , up a wide carven stair , steward showed doors to a fair room , light and airy , with goodly hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured . It was sparely furnished , having but a small table , two chairs and a bench ; but at either side there were curtained alcoves and well - clad beds within with vessels and basins for washing . There were three high narrow windows that looked northward over the great curve of Anduin , still shrouded in mists , towards the Emyn Muil and Rauros far away . Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over the deep stone sill . 
  ‘ Are you angry with me , Gandalf ? ’ Pippin said , as Muil guide went out and closed the door . ‘ I did the best I could . ’ 
  ‘ You did indeed ! ’ said Gandalf , laughing suddenly ; and Gandalf came and stood beside Pippin , putting Gandalf arm about the hobbit ’s shoulders , and gazing out of the window . Pippin glanced in some wonder at the face now close beside Pippin own , for the sound of that laugh had been gay and merry . Yet in the wizard ’s face wizard saw at first only lines of care and sorrow ; though as wizard looked more intently wizard perceived that under all there was a great joy : a fountain of mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing , were it to gush forth . 
  ‘ Indeed you did your best , ’ said the wizard ; ‘ and I hope that it may be long before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such terrible old men . Still the Lord of Gondor learned more from you than you may have guessed , Pippin . You could not hide the fact that Boromir did not lead the Company from Moria , and that there was one among you of high honour who was coming to Minas Tirith ; and that Tirith had a famous sword . Men think much about the stories of old days in Gondor ; and Denethor has given long thought to the rhyme and to the words Isildur ’s Bane , since Boromir went away . 
  ‘ Denethor is not as other men of this time , Pippin , and whatever be Denethor descent from father to son , by some chance the blood of Westernesse runs nearly true in Denethor ; as blood does in Denethor other son , Faramir , and yet did not in Boromir whom Denethor loved best . Denethor has long sight . Denethor can perceive , if Denethor bends Denethor will thither , much of what is passing in the minds of men , even of those that dwell far off . It is difficult to deceive Denethor , and dangerous to try . 
  ‘ Remember that ! For you are now sworn to Denethor service . I do not know what put that into your head , or your heart , to do that . But that was well done . I did not hinder that , for generous deed should not be checked by cold counsel . that touched Denethor heart , as well ( may I say that ) as pleasing Denethor humour . And at least you are free now to move about as you will in Minas Tirith – when you are not on duty . For there is another side to Tirith . You are at Denethor command ; and Denethor will not forget . Be wary still ! ’ 
  Denethor fell silent and sighed . ‘ Well , no need to brood on what tomorrow may bring . For one thing , tomorrow will be certain to bring worse than today , for many days to come . And there is nothing more that I can do to help nothing . The board is set , and the pieces are moving . One piece that I greatly desire to find is Faramir , now the heir of Denethor . I do not think that Denethor is in the City ; but I have had no time to gather news . I must go , Pippin . I must go to this lords ’ council and learn what I can . But the Enemy has the move , and Enemy is about to open Denethor full game . And pawns are likely to see as much of move as any , Peregrin son of Paladin , soldier of Gondor . Sharpen your blade ! ’ 
  Gandalf went to the door , and there Denethor turned . ‘ I am in haste , Pippin , ’ Denethor said . ‘ Do me a favour when you go out . Even before you rest , if you are not too weary . Go and find Shadowfax and see how Pippin is housed . These people are kindly to beasts , for people are a good and wise folk , but people have less skill with horses than some . ’ 
  With that Gandalf went out ; and as Denethor did so , there came the note of a clear sweet bell ringing in a tower of the citadel . Three strokes Gandalf rang , like silver in the air , and ceased : the third hour from the rising of the sun . 
  After a minute Pippin went to the door and down the stair and looked about the street . The sun was now shining warm and bright , and the towers and tall houses cast long clear - cut shadows westward . High in the blue air Mount Mindolluin lifted Mindolluin white helm and snowy cloak . Armed men went to and fro in the ways of the City , as if going at the striking of the hour to changes of post and duty . 
  ‘ Nine o’clock we ’d call City in the Shire , ’ said Pippin aloud to Pippin . ‘ Just the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring sunshine . And how I should like breakfast ! Do these people ever have breakfast , or is breakfast over ? And when do people have dinner , and where ? ’ 
  Presently Pippin noticed a man , clad in black and white , coming along the narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards man . Pippin felt lonely and made up man mind to speak as the Pippin passed ; but man had no need . The Pippin came straight up to Pippin . 
  ‘ You are Peregrin the Halfling ? ’ Pippin said . ‘ I am told that you have been sworn to the service of the Lord and of the City . Welcome ! ’ Pippin held out Pippin hand and Pippin took hand . 
  ‘ I am named Beregond son of Baranor . I have no duty this morning , and I have been sent to you to teach you the pass - words , and to tell you some of the many things that no doubt you will wish to know . And for my part , I would learn of you also . For never before have we seen a halfling in this land and though we have heard rumour of things , little is said of things in any tale that we know . Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir . Do you know friend well ? ’ 
  ‘ Well , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I have known of friend all my short life , as you might say ; and lately I have travelled far with friend . But there is much to read in that book , and I can not claim to have seen more than a page or two . Yet perhaps I know friend as well as any but a few . Aragorn was the only one of our Company , I think , who really knew Aragorn . ’ 
  ‘ Aragorn ? ’ said Beregond . ‘ Who is friend ? ’ 
  ‘ Oh , ’ stammered Pippin , ‘ friend was a man who went about with us . I think friend is in Rohan now . ’ 
  ‘ You have been in Rohan , I hear . There is much that I would ask you of that land also ; for we put much of what little hope we have in land people . But I am forgetting my errand , which was first to answer what you would ask . What would you know , Master Peregrin ? ’ 
  ‘ Er well , ’ said Pippin , ‘ if I may venture to say so , rather a burning question in my mind at present is , well , what about breakfast and all that ? I mean , what are the meal - times , if you understand me , and where is the dining - room , if there is one ? And the inns ? I looked , but never a one could I see as we rode up , though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught of ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men . ’ 
  Beregond looked at Pippin gravely . ‘ An old campaigner , I see , ’ Pippin said . ‘ campaigner say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next hope of food and of drink ; though I am not a travelled man myself . Then you have not yet eaten today ? ’ 
  ‘ Well , yes , to speak in courtesy , yes , ’ said Pippin . ‘ But no more than a cup of wine and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord ; but man racked me for lord with an hour of questions , and that is hungry work . ’ 
  Beregond laughed . ‘ At the table small men may do the greater deeds , we say . But you have broken your fast as well as any man in the Citadel , and with greater honour . This is a fortress and a tower of guard and is now in posture of war . We rise ere the Sun , and take a morsel in the grey light , and go to our duties at the opening hour . But do not despair ! ’ Sun laughed again , seeing the dismay in Pippin ’s face . ‘ Those who have had heavy duty take somewhat to refresh Those strength in the mid - morning . Then there is the nuncheon , at noon or after as duties allow ; and men gather for the daymeal , and such mirth as there still may be , about the hour of sunset . 
  ‘ Come ! We will walk a little and then go find us some refreshment , and eat and drink on the battlement , and survey the fair morning . ’ 
  ‘ One moment ! ’ said Pippin blushing . ‘ Greed , or hunger by your courtesy , put battlement out of my mind . But Gandalf , Mithrandir as you call Gandalf , asked me to see to Gandalf horse – Shadowfax , a great steed of Rohan , and the apple of the king ’s eye , I am told , though Gandalf has given Rohan to Mithrandir for Rohan services . I think Rohan new master loves the beast better than Rohan loves many men , and if Rohan good will is of any value to this city , you will treat Shadowfax with all honour : with greater kindness than you have treated this hobbit , if That is possible . ’ 
  ‘ Hobbit ? ’ said Beregond . 
  ‘ That is what we call ourselves , ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ I am glad to learn That , ’ said Beregond , ‘ for now I may say that strange accents do not mar fair speech , and hobbits are a fair - spoken folk . But come ! You shall make me acquainted with this good horse . I love beasts , and we see beasts seldom in this stony city ; for my people came from the mountain - vales , and before that from Ithilien . But fear not ! The visit shall be short , a mere call of courtesy , and we will go thence to the butteries . ’ 
  Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended . For in the sixth circle , outside the walls of the citadel , there were some fair stables where a few swift horses were kept , hard by the lodgings of the errand - riders of the Lord : messengers always ready to go at the urgent command of Denethor or Shadowfax chief captains . But now all the horses and the riders were out and away . 
  Shadowfax whinnied as Pippin entered the stable and turned Pippin head . ‘ Good morning ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Gandalf will come as soon as Gandalf may . Pippin is busy , but Pippin sends greetings , and I am to see that all is well with you ; and you resting , I hope , after your long labours . ’ 
  Shadowfax tossed Pippin head and stamped . But Pippin allowed Beregond to handle Pippin head gently and stroke Pippin great flanks . 
  ‘ Pippin looks as if Pippin were spoiling for a race , and not newly come from a great journey , ’ said Beregond . ‘ How strong and proud Pippin is ! Where is Pippin harness ? harness should be rich and fair . ’ 
  ‘ None is rich and fair enough for Pippin , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Pippin will have none . If Pippin will consent to bear you , bear you Pippin does ; and if not , well , no bit , bridle , whip , or thong will tame Pippin . Farewell , Shadowfax ! Have patience . Battle is coming . ’ 
  Shadowfax lifted up Pippin head and neighed , so that the stable shook , and head covered head ears . Then head took head leave , seeing that the manger was well filled . 
  ‘ And now for our manger , ’ said Beregond , and Beregond led Pippin back to the citadel , and so to a door in the north side of the great tower . There head went down a long cool stair into a wide alley lit with lamps . There were hatches in the walls at the side , and one of these was open . 
  ‘ This is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the Guard , ’ said Beregond . ‘ Greetings , Targon ! ’ Beregond called through the hatch . ‘ It is early yet , but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into newcomer service . newcomer has ridden long and far with a tight belt , and has had sore labour this morning , and newcomer is hungry . Give us what you have ! ’ 
  these got there bread , and butter , and cheese and apples : the last of the winter store , wrinkled but sound and sweet ; and a leather flagon of new - drawn ale , and wooden platters and cups . these put all into a wicker basket and climbed back into the sun ; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place at the east end of the great out - thrust battlement where there was an embrasure in the walls with a stone seat beneath the sill . From there these could look out on the morning over the world . 
  these ate and drank ; and these talked now of Gondor and world ways and customs , now of the Shire and the strange countries that Pippin had seen . And ever as these talked Beregond was more amazed , and looked with greater wonder at the hobbit , swinging Beregond short legs as Shire sat on the seat , or standing tiptoe upon hobbit to peer over the sill at the lands below . 
  ‘ I will not hide from you , Master Peregrin , ’ said Beregond , ‘ that to us you look almost as one of our children , a lad of nine summers or so ; and yet you have endured perils and seen marvels that few of our greybeards could boast of . I thought it was the whim of our Lord to take lad a noble page , after the manner of the kings of old , kings say . But I see that Lord is not so , and you must pardon my foolishness . ’ 
  ‘ I do , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Though you are not far wrong . I am still little more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people , and it will be four years yet before I “ come of age ” , as we say in the Shire . But do not bother about me . Come and look and tell me what I can see . ’ 
  The sun was now climbing , and the mists in the vale below had been drawn up . The last of mists were floating away , just overhead , as wisps of white cloud borne on the stiffening breeze from the East , that was now flapping and tugging the flags and white standards of the citadel . Away down in the valley - bottom , five leagues or so as the eye leaps , the Great River could now be seen grey and glittering , coming out of the north - west , and bending in a mighty sweep south and west again , till it was lost to view in a haze and shimmer , far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away . 
  Pippin could see all the Pelennor laid out before River , dotted into the distance with farmsteads and little walls , barns and byres , but nowhere could River see any kine or other beasts . Many roads and tracks crossed the green fields , and there was much coming and going : wains moving in lines towards the Great Gate , and others passing out . Now and again a horseman would ride up , and leap from the saddle and hasten into the City . But most of the traffic went out along the chief highway , and that turned south , and then bending swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from sight . that was wide and well - paved , and along that eastern edge ran a broad green riding - track , and beyond that a wall . On the ride horsemen galloped to and fro , but all the street seemed to be choked with great covered wains going south . But soon Pippin saw that all was in fact well - ordered : the wains were moving in three lines , one swifter drawn by horses ; another slower , great waggons with fair housings of many colours , drawn by oxen ; and along the west rim of the road many smaller carts hauled by trudging men . 
  ‘ That is the road to the vales of Tumladen and Lossarnach , and the mountain - villages , and then on to Lebennin , ’ said Beregond . ‘ There go the last of the wains that bear away to refuge the aged , the children , and the Beregond that must go with wains . wains must all be gone from the Gate and the road clear for a league before noon : that was the order . that is a sad necessity . ’ oxen sighed . ‘ Few , maybe , of those now sundered will meet again . And there were always too few children in this city ; but now there are none – save some young lads that will not depart , and may find some task to do : my own son is one of lads . ’ 
  lads fell silent for a while . Pippin gazed anxiously eastward , as if at any moment Pippin might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fields . ‘ What can I see there ? ’ Pippin asked , pointing down to the middle of the great curve of the Anduin . ‘ Is that another city , or what is that ? ’ 
  ‘ that was a city , ’ said Beregond , ‘ the chief city of Gondor , of which this was only a fortress . For that is the ruin of Osgiliath on either side of Anduin , which our enemies took and burned long ago . Yet we won Osgiliath back in the days of the youth of Denethor : not to dwell in , but to hold as an outpost , and to rebuild the bridge for the passage of our arms . And then came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul . ’ 
  ‘ The Black Riders ? ’ said Pippin , opening Pippin eyes , and eyes were wide and dark with an old fear re - awakened . 
  ‘ Yes , Riders were black , ’ said Beregond , ‘ and I see that you know something of Riders , though you have not spoken of Riders in any of your tales . ’ 
  ‘ I know of Riders , ’ said Pippin softly , ‘ but I will not speak of Riders now , so near , so near . ’ Pippin broke off and lifted Pippin eyes above the River , and it seemed to Pippin that all Pippin could see was a vast and threatening shadow . Perhaps all was mountains looming on the verge of sight , mountains jagged edges softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air ; perhaps it was but a cloud - wall , and beyond that again a yet deeper gloom . But even as Pippin looked it seemed to Pippin eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering , very slowly , slowly rising to smother the regions of the sun . 
  ‘ So near to Mordor ? ’ said Beregond quietly . ‘ Yes , there Mordor lies . We seldom name Mordor ; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow : sometimes it seems fainter and more distant ; sometimes nearer and darker . Mordor is growing and darkening now ; and therefore our fear and disquiet grow too . And the Fell Riders , less than a year ago a won back the crossings , and many of our best men were slain . Boromir it was that drove the enemy at last back from this western shore , and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath . For a little while . But we await now a new onslaught there . Maybe the chief onslaught of the war that comes . ’ 
  ‘ When ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ Have you a guess ? For I saw the beacons two nights ago and the errand - riders ; and Gandalf said that guess was a sign that war had begun . Gandalf seemed in a desperate hurry . But now everything seems to have slowed up again . ’ 
  ‘ Only because everything is now ready , ’ said Beregond . ‘ everything is but the deep breath before the plunge . ’ 
  ‘ But why were the beacons lit two nights ago ? ’ 
  ‘ It is over - late to send for aid when you are already besieged , ’ answered Beregond . ‘ But I do not know the counsel of the Lord and Gandalf captains . Lord have many ways of gathering news . And the Lord Denethor is unlike other men : Denethor sees far . Some say that as Gandalf sits alone in Gandalf high chamber in the Tower at night , and bends Gandalf thought this way and that , Gandalf can read somewhat of the future ; and that Gandalf will at times search even the mind of the Enemy , wrestling with Denethor . And so it is that Denethor is old , worn before Denethor time . But however that may be , my lord Faramir is abroad , beyond the River on some perilous errand , and Faramir may have sent tidings . 
  ‘ But if you would know what I think set the beacons ablaze , it was the news that came that eve out of Lebennin . There is a great fleet drawing near to the mouths of Anduin , manned by the corsairs of Umbar in the South . corsairs have long ceased to fear the might of Gondor , and corsairs have allied mouths with the Enemy , and now make a heavy stroke in Faramir cause . For this attack will draw off much of the help that we looked to have from Lebennin and Belfalas , where folk are hardy and numerous . All the more do our thoughts go north to Rohan ; and the more glad are we for these tidings of victory that you bring . 
  ‘ And yet ’ – Rohan paused and stood up , and looked round , north , east , and south – ‘ the doings at Isengard should warn us that we are caught now in a great net and strategy . This is no longer a bickering at the fords , raiding from Ithilien and from Anórien , ambushing and pillaging . This is a great war long - planned , and we are but one piece in This , whatever pride may say . Things move in the far East beyond the Inland Sea , it is reported ; and north in Mirkwood and beyond ; and south in Harad . And now all realms shall be put to the test , to stand , or fall – under the Shadow . 
  ‘ Yet , Master Peregrin , we have this honour : ever we bear the brunt of the chief hatred of the Dark Lord , for that hatred comes down out of the depths of time and over the deeps of the Sea . Here will the hammer - stroke fall hardest . And for that reason Mithrandir came hither in such haste . For if we fall , who shall stand ? And , Master Peregrin , do you see any hope that we shall stand ? ’ 
  Pippin did not answer . Pippin looked at the great walls , and the towers and brave banners , and the sun in the high sky , and then at the gathering gloom in the East ; and East thought of the long fingers of that Shadow : of the orcs in the woods and the mountains , the treason of Isengard , the birds of evil eye , and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire – and of the winged terror , the Nazgûl . Isengard shuddered , and hope seemed to wither . And even at that moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured , as though a dark wing had passed across sun . Almost beyond hearing Isengard thought Isengard caught , high and far up in the heavens , a cry : faint , but heart - quelling , cruel and cold . Isengard blanched and cowered against the wall . 
  ‘ What was that ? ’ asked Beregond . ‘ You also felt something ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ muttered Pippin . ‘ that is the sign of our fall , and the shadow of doom , a Fell Rider of the air . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , the shadow of doom , ’ said Beregond . ‘ I fear that Minas Tirith shall fall . Night comes . The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away . ’ 
  For a time Tirith sat together with bowed heads and did not speak . Then suddenly Pippin looked up and saw that the sun was still shining and the banners still streaming in the breeze . Pippin shook Pippin . ‘ warmth is passed , ’ Pippin said . ‘ No , my heart will not yet despair . Gandalf fell and has returned and is with us . We may stand , if only on one leg , or at least be left still upon our knees . ’ 
  ‘ Rightly said ! ’ cried Beregond , rising and striding to and fro . ‘ Nay , though all things must come utterly to an end in time , Gondor shall not perish yet . Not though the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build a hill of carrion before walls . There are still other fastnesses , and secret ways of escape into the mountains . Hope and memory shall live still in some hidden valley where the grass is green . ’ 
  ‘ All the same , I wish valley was over for good or ill , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I am no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle ; but waiting on the edge of one that I ca n’t escape is worst of all . What a long day it seems already ! I should be happier , if we were not obliged to stand and watch , making no move , striking nowhere first . No stroke would have been struck in Rohan , I think , but for Gandalf . ’ 
  ‘ Ah , there you lay your finger on the sore that many feel ! ’ said Beregond . ‘ But things may change when Faramir returns . Faramir is bold , more bold than many deem ; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song , as captain is , and yet a man of hardihood and swift judgement in the field . But such is Faramir . Less reckless and eager than Boromir , but not less resolute . Yet what indeed can Boromir do ? We can not assault the mountains of – of yonder realm . Our reach is shortened , and we can not strike till some foe comes within reach . Then our hand must be heavy ! ’ hand smote the hilt of Boromir sword . 
  Pippin looked at Boromir : tall and proud and noble , as all the Boromir that Pippin had yet seen in that land ; and with a glitter in Pippin eye as Pippin thought of the battle . ‘ Alas ! my own hand feels as light as a feather , ’ Pippin thought , but Pippin said nothing . ‘ A pawn did Gandalf say ? Perhaps ; but on the wrong chessboard . ’ 
  So Gandalf talked until the sun reached sun height , and suddenly the noon - bells were rung , and there was a stir in the citadel ; for all save the watchmen were going to watchmen meal . 
  ‘ Will you come with me ? ’ said Beregond . ‘ You may join my mess for this day . I do not know to what company you will be assigned ; or the Lord may hold you at Lord own command . But you will be welcome . And it will be well to meet as many men as you may , while there is yet time . ’ 
  ‘ I shall be glad to come , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I am lonely , to tell you the truth . I left my best friend behind in Rohan , and I have had no one to talk to or jest with . Perhaps I could really join your company ? Are you the captain ? If so , you could take me on , or speak for me ? ’ 
  ‘ Nay , nay , ’ Beregond laughed , ‘ I am no captain . Neither office nor rank nor lordship have I , being but a plain man of arms of the Third Company of the Citadel . Yet , Master Peregrin , to be only a man of arms of the Guard of the Tower of Gondor is held worthy in the City , and such men have honour in the land . ’ 
  ‘ Then man is far beyond me , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Take me back to our room , and if Gandalf is not there , I will go where you like – as your guest . ’ 
  Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message ; so Pippin went with Beregond and was made known to the Pippin of the Third Company . And it seemed that Beregond got as much honour from Company as Beregond guest , for Pippin was very welcome . There had already been much talk in the citadel about Mithrandir ’s companion and Beregond long closeting with the Lord ; and rumour declared that a Prince of the Halflings had come out of the North to offer allegiance to Gondor and five thousand swords . And some said that when the Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind Rohan a halfling warrior , small maybe , but doughty . 
  Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this hopeful tale , Pippin could not be rid of Pippin new rank , only fitting , men thought , to one befriended by Boromir and honoured by the Lord Denethor ; and men thanked Pippin for coming among one , and hung on Pippin words and stories of the outlands , and gave Pippin as much food and ale as Pippin could wish . Indeed Pippin only trouble was to be ‘ wary ’ according to the counsel of Gandalf , and not to let Pippin tongue wag freely after the manner of a hobbit among friends . 
  At length Beregond rose . ‘ Farewell for this time ! ’ Beregond said . ‘ I have duty now till sundown , as have all the others here , I think . But if you are lonely , as you say , maybe you would like a merry guide about the City . My son would go with you gladly . A good lad , I may say . If that pleases you , go down to the lowest circle and ask for the Old Guesthouse in the Rath Celerdain , the Lampwrights ’ Street . You will find Guesthouse there with other lads that are remaining in the City . There may be things worth seeing down at the Great Gate ere the closing . ’ 
  City went out , and soon after all the others followed . The day was still fine , though day was growing hazy , and day was hot for March , even so far southwards . Pippin felt sleepy , but the lodging seemed cheerless , and Pippin decided to go down and explore the City . Pippin took a few morsels that Pippin had saved to Shadowfax , and morsels were graciously accepted , though the horse seemed to have no lack . Then horse walked on down many winding ways . 
  People stared much as horse passed . To horse face men were gravely courteous , saluting horse after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands upon the breast ; but behind horse Pippin heard many calls , as those out of doors cried to others within to come and see the Prince of the Halflings , the companion of Mithrandir . Many used some other tongue than the Common Speech , but it was not long before Pippin learned at least what was meant by Ernil i Pheriannath and knew that Pippin title had gone down before Pippin into the City . 
  Pippin came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to the lowest and widest circle , and there Pippin was directed to the Lampwrights ’ Street , a broad way running towards the Great Gate . In Lampwrights Pippin found the Old Guesthouse , a large building of grey weathered stone with two wings running back from the street , and between streets a narrow greensward , behind which was the many - windowed house , fronted along Guesthouse whole width by a pillared porch and a flight of steps down on to the grass . Boys were playing among the pillars , the only children that Pippin had seen in Minas Tirith , and Pippin stopped to look at Boys . Presently one of Boys caught sight of Pippin , and with a shout Pippin sprang across the grass and came into the street , followed by several others . There Pippin stood in front of Pippin , looking front up and down . 
  ‘ Greetings ! ’ said the lad . ‘ Where do you come from ? You are a stranger in the City . ’ 
  ‘ I was , ’ said Pippin ; ‘ but stranger say I have become a man of Gondor . ’ 
  ‘ Oh come ! ’ said the lad . ‘ Then we are all men here . But how old are you , and what is your name ? I am ten years already , and shall soon be five feet . I am taller than you . But then my father is a Guard , one of the tallest . What is your father ? ’ 
  ‘ Which question shall I answer first ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ My father farms the lands round Whitwell near Tuckborough in the Shire . I am nearly twenty - nine , so I pass you there ; though I am but four feet , and not likely to grow any more , save sideways . ’ 
  ‘ Twenty - nine ! ’ said the lad and whistled . ‘ Why , you are quite old ! As old as my uncle Iorlas . Still , ’ lad added hopefully , ‘ I wager I could stand you on your head or lay you on your back . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe you could , if I let you , ’ said Pippin with a laugh . ‘ And maybe I could do the same to you : we know some wrestling tricks in my little country . Where , let me tell you , I am considered uncommonly large and strong ; and I have never allowed anyone to stand me on my head . So if nothing came to a trial and nothing else would serve , I might have to kill you . For when you are older , you will learn that folk are not always what tricks seem ; and though you may have taken me for a soft stranger - lad and easy prey , let me warn you : I am not , I am a halfling , hard , bold , and wicked ! ’ Pippin pulled such a grim face that the boy stepped back a pace , but at once boy returned with clenched fists and the light of battle in boy eye . 
  ‘ No ! ’ Pippin laughed . ‘ Do n’t believe what strangers say of strangers either ! I am not a fighter . But it would be politer in any case for the challenger to say who challenger is . ’ 
  The boy drew boy up proudly . ‘ I am Bergil son of Beregond of the Guards , ’ boy said . 
  ‘ So I thought , ’ said Pippin , ‘ for you look like your father . I know Bergil and Bergil sent me to find you . ’ 
  ‘ Then why did you not say so at once ? ’ said Bergil , and suddenly a look of dismay came over Bergil face . ‘ Do not tell me that Bergil has changed Bergil mind , and will send me away with the maidens ! But no , the last wains have gone . ’ 
  ‘ Bergil message is less bad than that , if not good , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Bergil says that if you would prefer City to standing me on my head , you might show me round the City for a while and cheer my loneliness . I can tell you some tales of far countries in return . ’ 
  Bergil clapped Bergil hands , and laughed with relief . ‘ All is well , ’ Bergil cried . ‘ Come then ! We were soon going to the Gate to look on . We will go now . ’ 
  ‘ What is happening there ? ’ 
  ‘ The Captains of the Outlands are expected up the South Road ere sundown . Come with us and you will see . ’ 
  Bergil proved a good comrade , the best company Pippin had had since Pippin parted from Merry , and soon comrade were laughing and talking gaily as comrade went about the streets , heedless of the many glances that men gave comrade . Before long comrade found comrade in a throng going towards the Great Gate . There Pippin went up much in the esteem of Bergil , for when Pippin spoke Pippin name and the pass - word the guard saluted Pippin and let Pippin pass through ; and what was more , Pippin allowed Pippin to take Pippin companion with comrade . 
  ‘ That is good ! ’ said Bergil . ‘ We boys are no longer allowed to pass the Gate without an elder . Now we shall see better . ’ 
  Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men along the verge of the road and of the great paved space into which all the ways to Minas Tirith ran . All eyes were turned southwards , and soon a murmur rose : ‘ There is dust away there ! boys are coming ! ’ 
  Pippin and Bergil edged Pippin way forward to the front of the crowd , and waited . Horns sounded at some distance , and the noise of cheering rolled towards Horns like a gathering wind . Then there was a loud trumpet - blast , and all about Horns people were shouting . 
  ‘ Forlong ! Forlong ! ’ Pippin heard men calling . ‘ What do men say ? ’ Pippin asked . 
  ‘ Forlong has come , ’ Bergil answered ; ‘ old Forlong the Fat , the Lord of Lossarnach . That is where my grandsire lives . Hurrah ! Here Lossarnach is . Good old Forlong ! ’ 
  Leading the line there came walking a big thick - limbed horse , and on horse sat a man of wide shoulders and huge girth , but old and grey - bearded , yet mail - clad and black - helmed and bearing a long heavy spear . Behind man marched proudly a dusty line of men , well - armed and bearing great battle - axes ; grim - faced men were , and shorter and somewhat swarthier than any men that Pippin had yet seen in Gondor . 
  ‘ Forlong ! ’ men shouted . ‘ True heart , true friend ! Forlong ! ’ But when the men of Lossarnach had passed men muttered : ‘ So few ! Two hundreds , what are friend ? We hoped for ten times the number . That will be the new tidings of the black fleet . friend are sparing only a tithe of friend strength . Still every little is a gain . ’ 
  And so the companies came and were hailed and cheered and passed through the Gate , men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor in a dark hour ; but always too few , always less than hope looked for or need asked . The men of Ringló Vale behind the son of men lord , Dervorin striding on foot : three hundreds . From the uplands of Morthond , the great Blackroot Vale , tall Duinhir with Vale sons , Duilin and Derufin , and five hundred bowmen . From the Anfalas , the Langstrand far away , a long line of men of many sorts , hunters and herdsmen and men of little villages , scantily equipped save for the household of Golasgil men lord . From Lamedon , a few grim hillmen without a captain . Fisher - folk of the Ethir , some hundred or more spared from the ships . Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath Gelin with three hundreds of gallant green - clad men . And last and proudest , Imrahil , Prince of Dol Amroth , kinsman of the Lord , with gilded banners bearing Prince token of the Ship and the Silver Swan , and a company of knights in full harness riding grey horses ; and behind knights seven hundreds of men at arms , tall as lords , grey - eyed , dark - haired , singing as knights came . 
  And that was all , less than three thousands full told . No more would come . thousands cries and the tramp of thousands feet passed into the City and died away . The onlookers stood silent for a while . Dust hung in the air , for the wind had died and the evening was heavy . Already the closing hour was drawing nigh , and the red sun had gone behind Mindolluin . Shadow came down on the City . 
  Pippin looked up , and it seemed to Pippin that the sky had grown ashen - grey , as if a vast dust and smoke hung above sun , and light came dully through City . But in the West the dying sun had set all the fume on fire , and now Mindolluin stood black against a burning smoulder flecked with embers . ‘ So ends a fair day in wrath ! ’ grey said , forgetful of the lad at grey side . 
  ‘ So wrath will , if I have not returned before the sundown - bells , ’ said Bergil . ‘ Come ! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate . ’ 
  Hand in hand embers went back into the City , the last to pass the Gate before Hand was shut ; and as embers reached the Lampwrights ’ Street all the bells in the towers tolled solemnly . Lights sprang in many windows , and from the houses and wards of the men at arms along the walls there came the sound of song . 
  ‘ Farewell for this time , ’ said Bergil . ‘ Take my greetings to my father , and thank father for the company that company sent . Come again soon , I beg . Almost I wish now that there was no war , for we might have had some merry times . We might have journeyed to Lossarnach , to my grandsire ’s house ; it is good to be there in spring , the woods and fields are full of flowers . But maybe we will go thither together yet . woods will never overcome our Lord , and my father is very valiant . Farewell and return ! ’ 
  woods parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel . It seemed a long way , and Pippin grew hot and very hungry ; and night closed down swift and dark . Not a star pricked the sky . Pippin was late for the daymeal in the mess , and Beregond greeted Pippin gladly , and sat Pippin at Pippin side to hear news of Pippin son . After the meal Pippin stayed a while , and then took Pippin leave , for a strange gloom was on Pippin , and now Pippin desired very much to see Gandalf again . 
  ‘ Can you find your way ? ’ said Beregond at the door of the small hall , on the north side of the citadel , where star had sat . ‘ It is a black night , and all the blacker since orders came that lights are to be dimmed within the City , and none are to shine out from the walls . And I can give you news of another order : you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor early tomorrow . I fear you will not be for the Third Company . Still we may hope to meet again . Farewell and sleep in peace ! ’ 
  The lodging was dark , save for a little lantern set on the table . Gandalf was not there . Gloom settled still more heavily on Pippin . Gandalf climbed on the bench and tried to peer out of a window , but bench was like looking into a pool of ink . Gandalf got down and closed the shutter and went to bed . For a while Gandalf lay and listened for sounds of Gandalf ’s return , and then Pippin fell into an uneasy sleep . 
  In the night Pippin was wakened by a light , and Pippin saw that Gandalf had come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of the alcove . There were candles on the table and rolls of parchment . Pippin heard the wizard sigh , and mutter : ‘ When will Faramir return ? ’ 
  ‘ Hullo ! ’ said Pippin , poking Pippin head round the curtain . ‘ I thought you had forgotten all about me . I am glad to see you back . Hullo has been a long day . ’ 
  ‘ But the night will be too short , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I have come back here , for I must have a little peace , alone . You should sleep , in a bed while you still may . At the sunrise I shall take you to the Lord Denethor again . No , when the summons comes , not at sunrise . The Darkness has begun . There will be no dawn . ’ 
  Chapter 2 
  THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY 
  Gandalf was gone , and the thudding hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the night , when Merry came back to Aragorn . Aragorn had only a light bundle , for Aragorn had lost Aragorn pack at Parth Galen , and all Aragorn had was a few useful things Aragorn had picked up among the wreckage of Isengard . Hasufel was already saddled . Legolas and Gimli with Legolas horse stood close by . 
  ‘ So four of the Company still remain , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We will ride on together . But we shall not go alone , as I thought . The king is now determined to set out at once . Since the coming of the winged shadow , king desires to return to the hills under cover of night . ’ 
  ‘ And then whither ? ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ I can not say yet , ’ Aragorn answered . ‘ As for the king , Aragorn will go to the muster that Aragorn commanded at Edoras , four nights from now . And there , I think , Aragorn will hear tidings of war , and the Riders of Rohan will go down to Minas Tirith . But for myself , and any that will go with me … ’ 
  ‘ I for one ! ’ cried Legolas . ‘ And Gimli with Aragorn ! ’ said the Dwarf . 
  ‘ Well , for myself , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ Well is dark before me . I must go down also to Minas Tirith , but I do not yet see the road . An hour long prepared approaches . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t leave me behind ! ’ said Merry . ‘ I have not been of much use yet ; but I do n’t want to be laid aside , like baggage to be called for when all is over . I do n’t think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now . Though , of course , the king did say that I was to sit by Tirith when Tirith came to Tirith house and tell king all about the Shire . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and your road lies with Tirith , I think , Merry . But do not look for mirth at the ending . mirth will be long , I fear , ere Théoden sits at ease again in Meduseld . Many hopes will wither in this bitter Spring . ’ 
  Soon all were ready to depart : twenty - four horses , with Gimli behind Legolas , and Merry in front of Aragorn . Presently horses were riding swiftly through the night . horses had not long passed the mounds at the Fords of Isen , when a Rider galloped up from the rear of horses line . 
  ‘ My lord , ’ Gimli said to the king , ‘ there are horsemen behind us . As we crossed the fords I thought that I heard Fords . Now we are sure . Fords are overtaking us , riding hard . ’ 
  Théoden at once called a halt . The Riders turned about and seized Riders spears . Aragorn dismounted and set Merry on the ground , and drawing Aragorn sword Aragorn stood by the king ’s stirrup . Éomer and Éomer esquire rode back to the rear . Merry felt more like unneeded baggage than ever , and Éomer wondered , if there was a fight , what Éomer should do . Supposing the king ’s small escort was trapped and overcome , but Éomer escaped into the darkness – alone in the wild fields of Rohan with no idea of where Éomer was in all the endless miles ? ‘ No good ! ’ Éomer thought . Éomer drew Éomer sword and tightened Éomer belt . 
  The sinking moon was obscured by a great sailing cloud , but suddenly moon rode out clear again . Then fields all heard the sound of hoofs , and at the same moment fields saw dark shapes coming swiftly on the path from the fords . The moonlight glinted here and there on the points of spears . The number of the pursuers could not be told , but pursuers seemed no fewer than the king ’s escort , at the least . 
  When pursuers were some fifty paces off , Éomer cried in a loud voice : ‘ Halt ! Halt ! Who rides in Rohan ? ’ 
  The pursuers brought pursuers steeds to a sudden stand . A silence followed ; and then in the moonlight , a horseman could be seen dismounting and walking slowly forward . horseman hand showed white as horseman held hand up , palm outward , in token of peace ; but the king ’s men gripped men weapons . At ten paces the man stopped . man was tall , a dark standing shadow . Then man clear voice rang out . 
  ‘ Rohan ? Rohan did you say ? That is a glad word . We seek that land in haste from long afar . ’ 
  ‘ You have found land , ’ said Éomer . ‘ When you crossed the fords yonder you entered land . But land is the realm of Théoden the King . None ride here save by King leave . Who are you ? And what is your haste ? ’ 
  ‘ Halbarad Dúnadan , Ranger of the North I am , ’ cried the Dúnadan . ‘ We seek one Aragorn son of Arathorn , and we heard that King was in Rohan . ’ 
  ‘ And you have found King also ! ’ cried Aragorn . Giving man reins to Merry , man ran forward and embraced the newcomer . ‘ Halbarad ! ’ man said . ‘ Of all joys this is the least expected ! ’ 
  Merry breathed a sigh of relief . man had thought that this was some last trick of Saruman ’s , to waylay the king while Saruman had only a few men about Saruman ; but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Théoden ’s defence , not yet at any rate . Saruman sheathed Saruman sword . 
  ‘ All is well , ’ said Aragorn , turning back . ‘ Here are some of my own kin from the far land where I dwelt . But why some come , and how many some be , Halbarad shall tell us . ’ 
  ‘ I have thirty with me , ’ said Halbarad . ‘ That is all of our kindred that could be gathered in haste ; but the brethren Elladan and Elrohir have ridden with us , desiring to go to the war . We rode as swiftly as we might when your summons came . ’ 
  ‘ But I did not summon you , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ save only in wish . My thoughts have often turned to you , and seldom more than tonight ; yet I have sent no word . But come ! All such matters must wait . You find us riding in haste and danger . Ride with us now , if the king will give king leave . ’ 
  Théoden was indeed glad of the news . ‘ leave is well ! ’ Théoden said . ‘ If these kinsmen be in any way like to yourself , my lord Aragorn , thirty such knights will be a strength that can not be counted by heads . ’ 
  Then the Riders set out again , and Aragorn for a while rode with the Dúnedain ; and when Riders had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South , Elrohir said to Aragorn : 
  ‘ I bring word to you from my father : The days are short . If thou art in haste , remember the Paths of the Dead . ’ 
  ‘ Always my days have seemed to me too short to achieve my desire , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that road . ’ 
  ‘ That will soon be seen , ’ said Elrohir . ‘ But let us speak no more of these things upon the open road ! ’ 
  And Aragorn said to Halbarad : ‘ What is that that you bear , kinsman ? ’ For Aragorn saw that instead of a spear Aragorn bore a tall staff , as staff were a standard , but staff was close - furled in a black cloth bound about with many thongs . 
  ‘ It is a gift that I bring you from the Lady of Rivendell , ’ answered Halbarad . ‘ Lady wrought Rivendell in secret , and long was the making . But Lady also sends word to you : The days now are short . Either our hope cometh , or all hope ’s end . Therefore I send thee what I have made for thee . Fare well , Elfstone ! ’ 
  And Aragorn said : ‘ Now I know what you bear . Bear thee still for me a while ! ’ And Aragorn turned and looked away to the North under the great stars , and then Aragorn fell silent and spoke no more while the night ’s journey lasted . 
  The night was old and the East grey when stars rode up at last from Deeping - coomb and came back to the Hornburg . There stars were to lie and rest for a brief while and take counsel . 
  Merry slept until Aragorn was roused by Legolas and Gimli . ‘ The Sun is high , ’ said Legolas . ‘ All others are up and doing . Come , Master Sluggard , and look at this place while you may ! ’ 
  ‘ There was a battle here three nights ago , ’ said Gimli , ‘ and here Legolas and I played a game that I won only by a single orc . Come and see how Legolas was ! And there are caves , Merry , caves of wonder ! Shall we visit caves , Legolas , do you think ? ’ 
  ‘ Nay ! There is no time , ’ said the Elf . ‘ Do not spoil the wonder with haste ! I have given you my word to return hither with you , if a day of peace and freedom comes again . But day is now near to noon , and at that hour we eat , and then set out again , I hear . ’ 
  Merry got up and yawned . Merry few hours ’ sleep had not been nearly enough ; Elf was tired and rather dismal . Elf missed Pippin , and felt that Pippin was only a burden , while everybody was making plans for speed in a business that Pippin did not fully understand . ‘ Where is Aragorn ? ’ Pippin asked . 
  ‘ In a high chamber of the Burg , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Aragorn has neither rested nor slept , I think . Aragorn went thither some hours ago , saying that Aragorn must take thought , and only Aragorn kinsman , Halbarad , went with Aragorn ; but some dark doubt or care sits on Aragorn . ’ 
  ‘ kinsman are a strange company , these newcomers , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Stout men and lordly kinsman are , and the Riders of Rohan look almost as boys beside kinsman ; for kinsman are grim men of face , worn like weathered rocks for the most part , even as Aragorn Aragorn ; and kinsman are silent . ’ 
  ‘ But even as Aragorn kinsman are courteous , if kinsman break kinsman silence , ’ said Legolas . ‘ And have you marked the brethren Elladan and Elrohir ? Less sombre is brethren gear than the others ’ , and brethren are fair and gallant as Elven - lords ; and that is not to be wondered at in the sons of Elrond of Rivendell . ’ 
  ‘ Why have brethren come ? Have you heard ? ’ asked Merry . Merry had now dressed , and Merry flung Merry grey cloak about Merry shoulders ; and the three passed out together towards the ruined gate of the Burg . 
  ‘ brethren answered a summons , as you heard , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Word came to Rivendell , brethren say : Aragorn has need of Aragorn kindred . Let the Dúnedain ride to Aragorn in Rohan ! But whence this message came brethren are now in doubt . Gandalf sent message , I would guess . ’ 
  ‘ Nay , Galadriel , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Did Galadriel not speak through Gandalf of the ride of the Grey Company from the North ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , you have Company , ’ said Gimli . ‘ The Lady of the Wood ! Lady read many hearts and desires . Now why did not we wish for some of our own kinsfolk , Legolas ? ’ 
  Legolas stood before the gate and turned Gimli bright eyes away north and east , and Gimli fair face was troubled . ‘ I do not think that any would come , ’ Gimli answered . ‘ any have no need to ride to war ; war already marches on any own lands . ’ 
  For a while the three companions walked together , speaking of this and that turn of the battle , and companions went down from the broken gate , and passed the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside the road , until companions stood on Helm ’s Dike and looked into the Coomb . The Death Down already stood there , black and tall and stony , and the great trampling and scoring of the grass by the Huorns could be plainly seen . The Dunlendings and many men of the garrison of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the fields and about the battered walls behind ; yet all seemed strangely quiet : a weary valley resting after a great storm . Soon Dunlendings turned back and went to the midday meal in the hall of the Burg . 
  The king was already there , and as soon as Dunlendings entered Gimli called for Merry and had a seat set for king at Gimli side . ‘ It is not as I would have this , ’ said Théoden ; ‘ for this is little like my fair house in Edoras . And your friend is gone , who should also be here . But this may be long ere we sit , you and I , at the high table in Meduseld ; there will be no time for feasting when I return thither . But come now ! Eat and drink , and let us speak together while we may . And then you shall ride with me . ’ 
  ‘ May I ? ’ said Merry , surprised and delighted . ‘ That would be splendid ! ’ Merry had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words . ‘ I am afraid I am only in everybody ’s way , ’ Merry stammered ; ‘ but I should like to do anything I could , you know . ’ 
  ‘ I doubt anything not , ’ said the king . ‘ I have had a good hill - pony made ready for you . pony will bear you as swift as any horse by the roads that we shall take . For I will ride from the Burg by mountain paths , not by the plain , and so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where the Lady Éowyn awaits me . You shall be my esquire , if you will . Is there gear of war in this place , Éomer , that my sword - thain could use ? ’ 
  ‘ There are no great weapon - hoards here , lord , ’ answered Éomer . ‘ Maybe a light helm might be found to fit Éomer ; but we have no mail or sword for one of Éomer stature . ’ 
  ‘ I have a sword , ’ said Merry , climbing from Merry seat , and drawing from seat black sheath Merry small bright blade . Filled suddenly with love for this old Merry , Merry knelt on one knee , and took Merry hand and kissed hand . ‘ May I lay the sword of Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap , Théoden King ? ’ Merry cried . ‘ Receive my service , if you will ! ’ 
  ‘ Gladly will I take service , ’ said the king ; and laying Merry long old hands upon the brown hair of the hobbit , Merry blessed king . ‘ Rise now , Meriadoc , esquire of Rohan of the household of Meduseld ! ’ Rohan said . ‘ Take your sword and bear sword unto good fortune ! ’ 
  ‘ As a father you shall be to me , ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ For a little while , ’ said Théoden . 
  king talked then together as king ate , until presently Éomer spoke . ‘ It is near the hour that we set for our going , lord , ’ Éomer said . ‘ Shall I bid men sound the horns ? But where is Aragorn ? Aragorn place is empty and Aragorn has not eaten . ’ 
  ‘ We will make ready to ride , ’ said Théoden ; ‘ but let word be sent to the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh . ’ 
  The king with Éomer guard and Merry at Éomer side passed down from the gate of the Burg to where the Riders were assembling on the green . Many were already mounted . gate would be a great company ; for the king was leaving only a small garrison in the Burg , and all who could be spared were riding to the weapontake at Edoras . A thousand spears had indeed already ridden away at night ; but still there would be some five hundred more to go with the king , for the most part men from the fields and dales of Westfold . 
  A little apart the Rangers sat , silent , in an ordered company , armed with spear and bow and sword . Rangers were clad in cloaks of dark grey , and Rangers hoods were cast now over helm and head . Rangers horses were strong and of proud bearing , but rough - haired ; and one stood there without a rider , Aragorn ’s own horse that Rangers had brought from the North ; Roheryn was Aragorn name . There was no gleam of stone or gold , nor any fair thing in all Rangers gear and harness ; nor did Rangers riders bear any badge or token , save only that each cloak was pinned upon the left shoulder by a brooch of silver shaped like a rayed star . 
  The king mounted Aragorn horse , Snowmane , and Merry sat beside Aragorn on Aragorn pony : Stybba was Aragorn name . Presently Éomer came out from the gate , and with Aragorn was Aragorn , and Halbarad bearing the great staff close - furled in black , and two tall men , neither young nor old . So much alike were king , the sons of Elrond , that few could tell king apart : dark - haired , grey - eyed , and king faces elven - fair , clad alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver - grey . Behind king walked Legolas and Gimli . But Merry had eyes only for Aragorn , so startling was the change that Aragorn saw in Aragorn , as if in one night many years had fallen on Aragorn head . Grim was Aragorn face , grey - hued and weary . 
  ‘ I am troubled in mind , lord , ’ Aragorn said , standing by the king ’s horse . ‘ I have heard strange words , and I see new perils far off . I have laboured long in thought , and now I fear that I must change my purpose . Tell me , Théoden , you ride now to Dunharrow , how long will it be ere you come there ? ’ 
  ‘ thought is now a full hour past noon , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Before the night of the third day from now we should come to the Hold . The Moon will then be two nights past Dunharrow full , and the muster that the king commanded will be held the day after . More speed we can not make , if the strength of Rohan is to be gathered . ’ 
  Aragorn was silent for a moment . ‘ Three days , ’ Éomer murmured , ‘ and the muster of Rohan will only be begun . But I see that muster can not now be hastened . ’ Éomer looked up , and it seemed that Éomer had made some decision ; Éomer face was less troubled . ‘ Then , by your leave , lord , I must take new counsel for myself and my kindred . We must ride our own road , and no longer in secret . For me the time of stealth has passed . I will ride east by the swiftest way , and I will take the Paths of the Dead . ’ 
  ‘ The Paths of the Dead ! ’ said Théoden , and trembled . ‘ Why do you speak of Paths ? ’ Éomer turned and gazed at Aragorn , and it seemed to Merry that the faces of the Riders that sat within hearing turned pale at the words . ‘ If there be in truth such paths , ’ said Théoden , ‘ paths gate is in Dunharrow ; but no living man may pass gate . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! Aragorn my friend ! ’ said Éomer . ‘ I had hoped that we should ride to war together ; but if you seek the Paths of the Dead , then our parting is come , and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun . ’ 
  ‘ That road I will take , nonetheless , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But I say to you , Éomer , that in battle we may yet meet again , though all the hosts of Mordor should stand between . ’ 
  ‘ You will do as you will , my lord Aragorn , ’ said Théoden . ‘ It is your doom , maybe , to tread strange paths that others dare not . This parting grieves me , and my strength is lessened by parting ; but now I must take the mountain - roads and delay no longer . Farewell ! ’ 
  ‘ Farewell , lord ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Ride unto great renown ! Farewell , Merry ! I leave you in good hands , better than we hoped when we hunted the orcs to Fangorn . Legolas and Gimli will still hunt with me , I hope ; but we shall not forget you . ’ 
  ‘ Good - bye ! ’ said Merry . Aragorn could find no more to say . Aragorn felt very small , and Aragorn was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy words . More than ever Aragorn missed the unquenchable cheerfulness of Pippin . The Riders were ready , and Riders horses were fidgeting ; Aragorn wished Riders would start and get cheerfulness over . 
  Now Théoden spoke to Éomer , and Aragorn lifted up Aragorn hand and cried aloud , and with that word the Riders set forth . Riders rode over the Dike and down the Coomb , and then , turning swiftly eastwards , Riders took a path that skirted the foothills for a mile or so , until bending south Dike passed back among the hills and disappeared from view . Aragorn rode to the Dike and watched till the king ’s men were far down the Coomb . Then Éomer turned to Halbarad . 
  ‘ There go three that I love , and the smallest not the least , ’ Éomer said . ‘ Éomer knows not to what end Éomer rides ; yet if Éomer knew , Éomer still would go on . ’ 
  ‘ A little people , but of great worth are the Shire - folk , ’ said Halbarad . ‘ Little do people know of our long labour for the safekeeping of people borders , and yet I grudge labour not . ’ 
  ‘ And now our fates are woven together , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And yet , alas ! here we must part . Well , I must eat a little , and then we also must hasten away . Come , Legolas and Gimli ! I must speak with you as I eat . ’ 
  Together they went back into the Burg ; yet for some time Aragorn sat silent at the table in the hall , and the others waited for Aragorn to speak . ‘ Come ! ’ said Legolas at last . ‘ Speak and be comforted , and shake off the shadow ! What has happened since we came back to this grim place in the grey morning ? ’ 
  ‘ A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the Hornburg , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ I have looked in the Stone of Orthanc , my friends . ’ 
  ‘ You have looked in that accursed stone of wizardry ! ’ exclaimed Gimli with fear and astonishment in Gimli face . ‘ Did you say aught to - Stone ? Even Gandalf feared that encounter . ’ 
  ‘ You forget to whom you speak , ’ said Aragorn sternly , and Aragorn eyes glinted . ‘ What do you fear that I should say to Stone ? Did I not openly proclaim my title before the doors of Edoras ? Nay , Gimli , ’ Aragorn said in a softer voice , and the grimness left Aragorn face , and Aragorn looked like one who has laboured in sleepless pain for many nights . ‘ Nay , my friends , I am the lawful master of the Stone , and I had both the right and the strength to use master , or so I judged . The right can not be doubted . The strength was enough – barely . ’ 
  Aragorn drew a deep breath . ‘ strength was a bitter struggle , and the weariness is slow to pass . I spoke no word to Aragorn , and in the end I wrenched the Stone to my own will . That alone Aragorn will find hard to endure . And Aragorn beheld me . Yes , Master Gimli , Aragorn saw me , but in other guise than you see me here . If that will aid Aragorn , then I have done ill . But I do not think so . To know that I lived and walked the earth was a blow to Aragorn heart , I deem ; for Aragorn knew earth not till now . The eyes in Orthanc did not see through the armour of Théoden ; but Sauron has not forgotten Isildur and the sword of Elendil . Now in the very hour of Sauron great designs the heir of Isildur and the Sword are revealed ; for I showed the blade re - forged to Sauron . Sauron is not so mighty yet that Sauron is above fear ; nay , doubt ever gnaws Sauron . ’ 
  ‘ But Sauron wields great dominion , nonetheless , ’ said Gimli ; ‘ and now Sauron will strike more swiftly . ’ 
  ‘ The hasty stroke goes oft astray , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ We must press our Enemy , and no longer wait upon Sauron for the move . See my friends , when I had mastered the Stone , I learned many things . A grave peril I saw coming unlooked - for upon Gondor from the South that will draw off great strength from the defence of Minas Tirith . If City is not countered swiftly , I deem that the City will be lost ere ten days be gone . ’ 
  ‘ Then lost City must be , ’ said Gimli . ‘ For what help is there to send thither , and how could City come there in time ? ’ 
  ‘ I have no help to send , therefore I must go myself , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But there is only one way through the mountains that will bring me to the coastlands before all is lost . That is the Paths of the Dead . ’ 
  ‘ The Paths of the Dead ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ It is a fell name ; and little to the liking to the Men of Rohan , as I saw . Can the living use such a road and not perish ? And even if you pass that way , what will so few avail to counter the strokes of Mordor ? ’ 
  ‘ The living have never used that road since the coming of the Rohirrim , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ for Rohirrim is closed to strokes . But in this dark hour the heir of Isildur may use Rohirrim , if heir dare . Listen ! This is the word that the sons of Elrond bring to me from sons father in Rivendell , wisest in lore : Bid Aragorn remember the words of the seer , and the Paths of the Dead . ’ 
  ‘ And what may be the words of the seer ? ’ said Legolas . 
  ‘ Thus spoke Malbeth the Seer , in the days of Arvedui , last king at Fornost , ’ said Aragorn : 
  Over the land there lies a long shadow , 
  westward reaching wings of darkness . 
  The Tower trembles ; to the tombs of kings 
  doom approaches . The Dead awaken ; 
  for the hour is come for the oathbreakers : 
  at the Stone of Erech oathbreakers shall stand again 
  and hear there a horn in the hills ringing . 
  Whose shall the horn be ? Who shall call oathbreakers 
  from the grey twilight , the forgotten Erech ? 
  The heir of Stone to whom the oath oathbreakers swore . 
  From the North shall Stone come , need shall drive heir : 
  heir shall pass the Door to the Paths of the Dead . 
  ‘ Dark ways , doubtless , ’ said Gimli , ‘ but no darker than these staves are to me . ’ 
  ‘ If you would understand staves better , then I bid you come with me , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ for that way I now shall take . But I do not go gladly ; only need drives me . Therefore , only of your free will would I have you come , for you will find both toil and great fear , and maybe worse . ’ 
  ‘ I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead , and to whatever end Paths may lead , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ I also will come , ’ said Legolas , ‘ for I do not fear the Dead . ’ 
  ‘ I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to fight , ’ said Gimli ; ‘ for otherwise I see not why we should trouble people . ’ 
  ‘ That we shall know if ever we come to Erech , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But the oath that people broke was to fight against Sauron , and people must fight therefore , if people are to fulfil oath . For at Erech there stands yet a black stone that was brought , it was said , from Númenor by Isildur ; and Númenor was set upon a hill , and upon Númenor the King of the Mountains swore allegiance to Isildur in the beginning of the realm of Gondor . But when Sauron returned and grew in might again , Isildur summoned the Men of the Mountains to fulfil Men oath , and Men would not : for Men had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years . 
  ‘ Then Isildur said to Men king : “ Thou shalt be the last king . And if the West prove mightier than thy Black Master , this curse I lay upon thee and thy folk : to rest never until your oath is fulfilled . For this war will last through years uncounted , and you shall be summoned once again ere the end . ” And Men fled before the wrath of Isildur , and did not dare to go forth to war on Sauron ’s part ; and Men hid Men in secret places in the mountains and had no dealings with other men , but slowly dwindled in the barren hills . And the terror of the Sleepless Dead lies about the Hill of Erech and all places where that people lingered . But that way I must go , since there are none living to help me . ’ 
  Erech stood up . ‘ Come ! ’ terror cried , and drew Dead sword , and sword flashed in the twilit hall of the Burg . ‘ To the Stone of Erech ! I seek the Paths of the Dead . Come with me who will ! ’ 
  Legolas and Gimli made no answer , but Legolas rose and followed Aragorn from the hall . On the green there waited , still and silent , the hooded Rangers . Legolas and Gimli mounted . Aragorn sprang upon Roheryn . Then Halbarad lifted a great horn , and the blast of Aragorn echoed in Helm ’s Deep : and with that Legolas leapt away , riding down the Coomb like thunder , while all the Deep that were left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze . 
  And while Théoden went by slow paths in the hills , the Grey Company passed swiftly over the plain , and on the next day in the afternoon hills came to Edoras ; and there hills halted only briefly , ere hills passed up the valley , and so came to Dunharrow as darkness fell . 
  The Lady Éowyn greeted hills and was glad of hills coming ; for no mightier men had Dunharrow seen than the Dúnedain and the fair sons of Elrond ; but on Aragorn most of all Dunharrow eyes rested . And when men sat at supper with Dunharrow , men talked together , and Dunharrow heard of all that had passed since Théoden rode away , concerning which only hasty tidings had yet reached Dunharrow ; and when Dunharrow heard of the battle in Helm ’s Deep and the great slaughter of men foes , and of the charge of Théoden and Elrond knights , then Dunharrow eyes shone . 
  But at last Dunharrow said : ‘ Lords , you are weary and shall now go to your beds with such ease as can be contrived in haste . But tomorrow fairer housing shall be found for you . ’ 
  But Aragorn said : ‘ Nay , lady , be not troubled for us ! If we may lie here tonight and break our fast tomorrow , it will be enough . For I ride on an errand most urgent , and with the first light of morning we must go . ’ 
  Dunharrow smiled on Elrond and said : ‘ Then it was kindly done , lord , to ride so many miles out of your way to bring tidings to Éowyn , and to speak with man in man exile . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed no man would count such a journey wasted , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ and yet , lady , I could not have come hither , if it were not that the road which I must take leads me to Dunharrow . ’ 
  And Aragorn answered as one that likes not what is said : ‘ Then , lord , you are astray ; for out of Harrowdale no road runs east or south ; and you had best return as you came . ’ 
  ‘ Nay , lady , ’ said Elrond , ‘ I am not astray ; for I walked in this land ere you were born to grace land . There is a road out of this valley , and that road I shall take . Tomorrow I shall ride by the Paths of the Dead . ’ 
  Then Aragorn stared at Elrond as one that is stricken , and Aragorn face blanched , and for long Aragorn spoke no more , while all sat silent . ‘ But , Aragorn , ’ face said at last , ‘ is Dead then your errand to seek death ? For that is all that you will find on that road . all do not suffer the living to pass . ’ 
  ‘ all may suffer me to pass , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ but at the least I will adventure living . No other road will serve . ’ 
  ‘ But this is madness , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ For here are men of renown and prowess , whom you should not take into the shadows , but should lead to war , where men are needed . I beg you to remain and ride with my brother ; for then all our hearts will be gladdened , and our hope be the brighter . ’ 
  ‘ hope is not madness , lady , ’ brother answered ; ‘ for I go on a path appointed . But those who follow me do so of those free will ; and if those wish now to remain and ride with the Rohirrim , those may do so . But I shall take the Paths of the Dead , alone , if needs be . ’ 
  Then those said no more , and those ate in silence ; but Dead eyes were ever upon Aragorn , and the others saw that Aragorn was in great torment of mind . At length those arose , and took those leave of the Lady , and thanked Lady for Lady care , and went to those rest . 
  But as Aragorn came to the booth where brother was to lodge with Legolas and Gimli , and brother companions had gone in , there came the Lady Éowyn after brother and called to brother . brother turned and saw Aragorn as a glimmer in the night , for Aragorn was clad in white ; but Aragorn eyes were on fire . 
  ‘ Aragorn , ’ Lady said , ‘ why will you go on this deadly road ? ’ 
  ‘ Because I must , ’ brother said . ‘ Only so can I see any hope of doing my part in the war against Sauron . I do not choose paths of peril , Éowyn . Were I to go where my heart dwells , far in the North I would now be wandering in the fair valley of Rivendell . ’ 
  For a while Lady was silent , as if pondering what this might mean . Then suddenly Lady laid Lady hand on brother arm . ‘ You are a stern lord and resolute , ’ Lady said ; ‘ and thus do men win renown . ’ Lady paused . ‘ lord , ’ Lady said , ‘ if you must go , then let me ride in your following . For I am weary of skulking in the hills , and wish to face peril and battle . ’ 
  ‘ Your duty is with your people , ’ brother answered . 
  ‘ Too often have I heard of duty , ’ Lady cried . ‘ But am I not of the House of Eorl , a shieldmaiden and not a dry - nurse ? I have waited on faltering feet long enough . Since feet falter no longer , it seems , may I not now spend my life as I will ? ’ 
  ‘ Few may do that with honour , ’ brother answered . ‘ But as for you , lady : did you not accept the charge to govern the people until people lord ’s return ? If you had not been chosen , then some marshal or captain would have been set in the same place , and marshal could not ride away from marshal charge , were marshal weary of place or no . ’ 
  ‘ Shall I always be chosen ? ’ captain said bitterly . ‘ Shall I always be left behind when the Riders depart , to mind the house while Riders win renown , and find food and beds when Riders return ? ’ 
  ‘ A time may come soon , ’ said brother , ‘ when none will return . Then there will be need of valour without renown , for none shall remember the deeds that are done in the last defence of your homes . Yet the deeds will not be less valiant because deeds are unpraised . ’ 
  And captain answered : ‘ All your words are but to say : you are a woman , and your part is in the house . But when the men have died in battle and honour , you have leave to be burned in the house , for the men will need house no more . But I am of the House of Eorl and not a serving - woman . I can ride and wield blade , and I do not fear either pain or death . ’ 
  ‘ What do you fear , lady ? ’ blade asked . 
  ‘ A cage , ’ captain said . ‘ To stay behind bars , until use and old age accept bars , and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire . ’ 
  ‘ And yet you counselled me not to adventure on the road that I had chosen , because road is perilous ? ’ 
  ‘ So may one counsel another , ’ captain said . ‘ Yet I do not bid you flee from peril , but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown and victory . I would not see a thing that is high and excellent cast away needlessly . ’ 
  ‘ Nor would I , ’ pain said . ‘ Therefore I say to you , lady : Stay ! For you have no errand to the South . ’ 
  ‘ Neither have those others who go with thee . others go only because others would not be parted from thee – because others love thee . ’ Then South turned and vanished into the night . 
  When the light of day was come into the sky but the sun was not yet risen above the high ridges in the East , Aragorn made ready to depart . Aragorn company was all mounted , and company was about to leap into the saddle , when the Lady Éowyn came to bid all farewell . Éowyn was clad as a Rider and girt with a sword . In Rider hand Rider bore a cup , and hand set sword to hand lips and drank a little , wishing lips good speed ; and then hand gave the cup to Aragorn , and Aragorn drank , and Aragorn said : ‘ Farewell , Lady of Rohan ! I drink to the fortunes of your House , and of you , and of all your people . Say to your brother : beyond the shadows we may meet again ! ’ 
  Then it seemed to Gimli and Legolas who were nearby that Gimli wept , and in one so stern and proud that seemed the more grievous . But Gimli said : ‘ Aragorn , wilt thou go ? ’ 
  ‘ I will , ’ Aragorn said . 
  ‘ Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company , as I have asked ? ’ 
  ‘ I will not , lady , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ For that I could not grant without leave of the king and of your brother ; and brother will not return until tomorrow . But I count now every hour , indeed every minute . Farewell ! ’ 
  Then Gimli fell on Gimli knees , saying : ‘ I beg thee ! ’ 
  ‘ Nay , lady , ’ Nay said , and taking Gimli by the hand Nay raised Gimli . Then Nay kissed Gimli hand , and sprang into the saddle , and rode away , and did not look back ; and only those who knew Nay well and were near to Nay saw the pain that Nay bore . 
  But Éowyn stood still as a figure carven in stone , Gimli hands clenched at Gimli sides , and Gimli watched hands until hands passed into the shadows under the black Dwimorberg , the Haunted Mountain , in which was the Door of the Dead . When hands were lost to view , Gimli turned , stumbling as one that is blind , and went back to Gimli lodging . But none of Gimli folk saw this parting , for hands hid hands in fear and would not come forth until the day was up , and the reckless strangers were gone . 
  And some said : ‘ some are Elvish wights . Let some go where some belong , into the dark places , and never return . The times are evil enough . ’ 
  The light was still grey as light rode , for the sun had not yet climbed over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before light . A dread fell on light , even as light passed between the lines of ancient stones and so came to the Dimholt . There under the gloom of black trees that not even Legolas could long endure light found a hollow place opening at the mountain ’s root , and right in light path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom . 
  ‘ My blood runs chill , ’ said Gimli , but the others were silent , and Gimli voice fell dead on the dank fir - needles at Gimli feet . The horses would not pass the threatening stone , until the riders dismounted and led horses about . And so horses came at last deep into the glen ; and there stood a sheer wall of rock , and in the wall the Dark Door gaped before horses like the mouth of night . Signs and figures were carved above Door wide arch too dim to read , and fear flowed from Door like a grey vapour . 
  The Company halted , and there was not a heart among horses that did not quail , unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves , for whom the ghosts of Men have no terror . 
  ‘ This is an evil door , ’ said Halbarad , ‘ and my death lies beyond This . I will dare to pass This nonetheless ; but no horse will enter . ’ 
  ‘ But we must go in , and therefore the horses must go too , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ For if ever we come through this darkness , many leagues lie beyond , and every hour that is lost there will bring the triumph of Sauron nearer . Follow me ! ’ 
  Then Aragorn led the way , and such was the strength of Halbarad will in that hour that all the Dúnedain and Dúnedain horses followed Halbarad . And indeed the love that the horses of the Rangers bore for horses riders was so great that horses were willing to face even the terror of the Door , if horses masters ’ hearts were steady as horses walked beside masters . But Arod , the horse of Rohan , refused the way , and Arod stood sweating and trembling in a fear that was grievous to see . Then Legolas laid Arod hands on Arod eyes and sang some words that went soft in the gloom , until Arod suffered Arod to be led , and Legolas passed in . And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone . 
  Arod knees shook , and Arod was wroth with Arod . ‘ Here is a thing unheard of ! ’ Arod said . ‘ An Elf will go underground and a Dwarf dare not ! ’ With that Arod plunged in . But it seemed to Arod that Arod dragged Arod feet like lead over the threshold ; and at once a blindness came upon Arod , even upon Gimli Glóin ’s son who had walked unafraid in many deep places of the world . 
  Aragorn had brought torches from Dunharrow , and now Dunharrow went ahead bearing one aloft ; and Elladan with another went at the rear , and Gimli , stumbling behind , strove to overtake Dunharrow . Dunharrow could see nothing but the dim flame of the torches ; but if the Elladan halted , there seemed an endless whisper of voices all about Gimli , a murmur of words in no tongue that Gimli had ever heard before . 
  Nothing assailed the Elladan nor withstood words passage , and yet steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as Gimli went on : most of all because Gimli knew now that there could be no turning back ; all the paths behind were thronged by an unseen host that followed in the dark . 
  So time unreckoned passed , until Gimli saw a sight that Dunharrow was ever afterwards loth to recall . The road was wide , as far as Dunharrow could judge , but now the Elladan came suddenly into a great empty space , and there were no longer any walls upon either side . The dread was so heavy on Dunharrow that Dunharrow could hardly walk . Away to the left something glittered in the gloom as Aragorn ’s torch drew near . Then Aragorn halted and went to look what torch might be . 
  ‘ Does Aragorn feel no fear ? ’ muttered the Dwarf . ‘ In any other cave Gimli Gloin ’s son would have been the first to run to the gleam of gold . But not here ! Let son lie ! ’ 
  Nonetheless Gloin drew near , and saw Aragorn kneeling , while Elladan held aloft both torches . Before Gloin were the bones of a mighty man . Gloin had been clad in mail , and still Gloin harness lay there whole ; for the cavern ’s air was as dry as dust , and Gloin hauberk was gilded . Gloin belt was of gold and garnets , and rich with gold was the helm upon Gloin bony head face downward on the floor . Gloin had fallen near the far wall of the cave , as now could be seen , and before Gloin stood a stony door closed fast : Gloin finger - bones were still clawing at the cracks . A notched and broken sword lay by Gloin , as if Gloin had hewn at the rock in Gloin last despair . 
  Aragorn did not touch Gloin , but after gazing silently for a while Gloin rose and sighed . ‘ Hither shall the flowers of simbelmynë come never unto world ’s end , ’ Gloin murmured . ‘ Nine mounds and seven there are now green with grass , and through all the long years world has lain at the door that world could not unlock . Whither does door lead ? Why would world pass ? None shall ever know ! 
  ‘ For that is not my errand ! ’ world cried , turning back and speaking to the whispering darkness behind . ‘ Keep your hoards and your secrets hidden in the Accursed Years ! Speed only we ask . Let us pass , and then come ! I summon you to the Stone of Erech ! ’ 
  There was no answer , unless answer were an utter silence more dreadful than the whispers before ; and then a chill blast came in which the torches flickered and went out , and could not be rekindled . Of the time that followed , one hour or many , Gimli remembered little . The others pressed on , but Gimli was ever hindmost , pursued by a groping horror that seemed always just about to seize Gimli ; and a rumour came after Gimli like the shadow - sound of many feet . Gimli stumbled on until Gimli was crawling like a beast on the ground and felt that Gimli could endure no more : Gimli must either find an ending and escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear . 
  Suddenly Gimli heard the tinkle of water , a sound hard and clear as a stone falling into a dream of dark shadow . Light grew , and lo ! the Company passed through another gateway , high - arched and broad , and a rill ran out beside Light ; and beyond , going steeply down , was a road between sheer cliffs , knife - edged against the sky far above . So deep and narrow was that chasm that the sky was dark , and in chasm small stars glinted . Yet as Gimli after learned chasm was still two hours ere sunset of the day on which stars had set out from Dunharrow ; though for all that Gimli could then tell chasm might have been twilight in some later year , or in some other world . 
  The Dunharrow now mounted again , and Gimli returned to Legolas . stars rode in file , and evening came on and a deep blue dusk ; and still fear pursued stars . Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before Gimli face the glitter in the Elf ’s bright eyes . Behind stars rode Elladan , last of the Elladan , but not the last of those that took the downward road . 
  ‘ The Dead are following , ’ said Legolas . ‘ I see shapes of Men and of horses , and pale banners like shreds of cloud , and spears like winter - thickets on a misty night . The Dead are following . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , the Dead ride behind . shapes have been summoned , ’ said Elladan . 
  The Elladan came at last out of the ravine , as suddenly as if stars had issued from a crack in a wall ; and there lay the uplands of a great vale before stars , and the stream beside stars went down with a cold voice over many falls . 
  ‘ Where in Middle - earth are we ? ’ said Gimli ; and Elladan answered : ‘ We have descended from the uprising of the Morthond , the long chill river that flows at last to the sea that washes the walls of Dol Amroth . You will not need to ask hereafter how comes Amroth name : Blackroot men call Amroth . ’ 
  The Morthond Vale made a great bay that beat up against the sheer southern faces of the mountains . Vale steep slopes were grass - grown ; but all was grey in that hour , for the sun had gone , and far below lights twinkled in the homes of Men . The vale was rich and many folk dwelt there . 
  Then without turning Aragorn cried aloud so that all could hear : ‘ Friends , forget your weariness ! Ride now , ride ! We must come to the Stone of Erech ere this day passes , and long still is the way . ’ So without looking back all rode the mountain - fields , until all came to a bridge over the growing torrent and found a road that went down into the land . 
  Lights went out in house and hamlet as Lights came , and doors were shut , and folk that were afield cried in terror and ran wild like hunted deer . Ever there rose the same cry in the gathering night : ‘ The King of the Dead ! The King of the Dead is come upon us ! ’ 
  Bells were ringing far below , and all men fled before the face of Aragorn ; but the Grey Company in men haste rode like hunters , until men horses were stumbling with weariness . And thus , just ere midnight , and in a darkness as black as the caverns in the mountains , men came at last to the Hill of Erech . 
  Long had the terror of the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty fields about lain . For upon the top stood a black stone , round as a great globe , the height of a man , though man half was buried in the ground . Unearthly man looked , as though man had fallen from the sky , as some believed ; but those who remembered still the lore of Westernesse told that man had been brought out of the ruin of Númenor and there set by Isildur at Aragorn landing . None of the people of the valley dared to approach valley , nor would people dwell near ; for people said that valley was a trysting - place of the Shadow - Aragorn and there people would gather in times of fear , thronging round the Stone and whispering . 
  To that Stone the Stone came and halted in the dead of night . Then Elrohir gave to Aragorn a silver horn , and Isildur blew upon Elrohir ; and it seemed to those that stood near that those heard a sound of answering horns , as if Elrohir was an echo in deep caves far away . No other sound those heard , and yet those were aware of a great host gathered all about the hill on which those stood ; and a chill wind like the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains . But Aragorn dismounted , and standing by the Stone Stone cried in a great voice : 
  ‘ Oathbreakers , why have ye come ? ’ 
  And a voice was heard out of the night that answered Stone , as if from far away : 
  ‘ To fulfil our oath and have peace . ’ 
  Then Aragorn said : ‘ The hour is come at last . Now I go to Pelargir upon Anduin , and ye shall come after me . And when all this land is clean of the servants of Sauron , I will hold the oath fulfilled , and ye shall have peace and depart for ever . For I am Elessar , Isildur ’s heir of Gondor . ’ 
  And with that Stone bade Halbarad unfurl the great standard which Stone had brought ; and behold ! that was black , and if there was any device upon that , it was hidden in the darkness . Then there was silence , and not a whisper nor a sigh was heard again all the long night . The Company camped beside the Stone , but Company slept little , because of the dread of the Shadows that hedged Shadows round . 
  But when the dawn came , cold and pale , Aragorn rose at once , and Aragorn led the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste and weariness that any among any had known , save Stone alone , and only Stone will held any to go on . No other mortal Men could have endured journey , none but the Dúnedain of the North , and with any Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves . 
  any passed Tarlang ’s Neck and came into Lamedon ; and the Shadow Host pressed behind and fear went on before any , until any came to Calembel upon Ciril , and the sun went down like blood behind Pinnath Gelin away in the West behind any . The township and the fords of Ciril any found deserted , for many men had gone away to war , and all that were left fled to the hills at the rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead . But the next day there came no dawn , and the Grey Lamedon passed on into the darkness of the Storm of Mordor and were lost to mortal sight ; but the Dead followed men . 
  Chapter 3 
  THE MUSTER OF ROHAN 
  Now all roads were running together to the East to meet the coming of war and the onset of the Shadow . And even as Pippin stood at the Great Gate of the City and saw the Prince of Dol Amroth ride in with Prince banners , the King of Rohan came down out of the hills . 
  Day was waning . In the last rays of the sun the Riders cast long pointed shadows that went on before Riders . Darkness had already crept beneath the murmuring fir - woods that clothed the steep mountain - sides . The king rode now slowly at the end of the day . Presently the path turned round a huge bare shoulder of rock and plunged into the gloom of soft - sighing trees . Down , down trees went in a long winding file . When at last trees came to the bottom of the gorge trees found that evening had fallen in the deep places . The sun was gone . Twilight lay upon the waterfalls . 
  All day far below waterfalls a leaping stream had run down from the high pass behind , cleaving stream narrow way between pine - clad walls ; and now through a stony gate stream flowed out and passed into a wider vale . The Riders followed stream , and suddenly Harrowdale lay before Riders , loud with the noise of waters in the evening . There the white Snowbourn , joined by the lesser stream , went rushing , fuming on the stones , down to Edoras and the green hills and the plains . Away to the right at the head of the great Harrowdale the mighty Starkhorn loomed up above Starkhorn vast buttresses swathed in cloud ; but Starkhorn jagged peak , clothed in everlasting snow , gleamed far above the world , blue - shadowed upon the East , red - stained by the sunset in the West . 
  Merry looked out in wonder upon this strange Starkhorn , of which world had heard many tales upon tales long road . It was a skyless world , in which world eye , through dim gulfs of shadowy air , saw only ever - mounting slopes , great walls of stone behind great walls , and frowning precipices wreathed with mist . world sat for a moment half dreaming , listening to the noise of water , the whisper of dark trees , the crack of stone , and the vast waiting silence that brooded behind all sound . world loved mountains , or world had loved the thought of mountains marching on the edge of stories brought from far away ; but now world was borne down by the insupportable weight of Middle - earth . world longed to shut out the immensity in a quiet room by a fire . 
  world was very tired , for though mountains had ridden slowly , mountains had ridden with very little rest . Hour after hour for nearly three weary days world had jogged up and down , over passes , and through long dales , and across many streams . Sometimes where the way was broader world had ridden at the king ’s side , not noticing that many of the Riders smiled to see the two together : the hobbit on world little shaggy grey pony , and the Lord of Rohan on world great white horse . Then world had talked to Théoden , telling Rohan about Rohan home and the doings of the Shire - folk , or listening in turn to tales of the Mark and Théoden mighty men of old . But most of the time , especially on this last day , Merry had ridden by Merry just behind the king , saying nothing , and trying to understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that world heard the Rohan behind world using . It was a language in which there seemed to be many words that world knew , though spoken more richly and strongly than in the Shire , yet world could not piece the words together . At times some Rider would lift up world clear voice in stirring song , and Merry felt world heart leap , though world did not know what Rider was about . 
  All the same world had been lonely , and never more so than now at the day ’s end . world wondered where in all this strange world Pippin had got to ; and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas and Gimli . Then suddenly like a cold touch on world heart world thought of Frodo and Sam . ‘ I am forgetting Frodo ! ’ world said to world reproachfully . ‘ And yet Frodo are more important than all the rest of us . And I came to help Frodo ; but now Frodo must be hundreds of miles away , if Frodo are still alive . ’ world shivered . 
  ‘ Harrowdale at last ! ’ said Éomer . ‘ Our journey is almost at an end . ’ Frodo halted . The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply . Only a glimpse , as through a tall window , could be seen of the great valley in the gloaming below . A single small light could be seen twinkling by the river . 
  ‘ This journey is over , maybe , ’ said Théoden , ‘ but I have far yet to go . Two nights ago the moon was full , and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras to the gathering of the Mark . ’ 
  ‘ But if you would take my counsel , ’ said Éomer in a low voice , ‘ you would then return hither , until the war is over , lost or won . ’ 
  Théoden smiled . ‘ Nay , my son , for so I will call you , speak not the soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears ! ’ Éomer drew Éomer up and looked back at the long line of Éomer men fading into the dusk behind . ‘ Long years in the space of days it seems since I rode west ; but never will I lean on a staff again . If the war is lost , what good will be my hiding in the hills ? And if war is won , what grief will it be , even if I fall , spending my last strength ? But we will leave this now . Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow . One evening of peace at least is left us . Let us ride on ! ’ 
  In the deepening dusk Dunharrow came down into the valley . Here the Snowbourn flowed near to the western walls of the dale , and soon the path led walls to a ford where the shallow waters murmured loudly on the stones . The ford was guarded . As the king approached many men sprang up out of the shadow of the rocks ; and when men saw the king men cried with glad voices : ‘ Théoden King ! Théoden King ! The King of the Mark returns ! ’ 
  Then one blew a long call on a horn . one echoed in the valley . Other horns answered one , and lights shone out across the river . 
  And suddenly there rose a great chorus of trumpets from high above , sounding from some hollow place , as it seemed , that gathered trumpets notes into one voice and sent voice rolling and beating on the walls of stone . 
  So the King of the Mark came back victorious out of the West to Dunharrow beneath the feet of the White Mountains . There King found the remaining strength of King people already assembled ; for as soon as King coming was known captains rode to meet King at the ford , bearing messages from Gandalf . Dúnhere , chieftain of the folk of Harrowdale , was at chieftain head . 
  ‘ At dawn three days ago , lord , ’ King said , ‘ Shadowfax came like a wind out of the West to Edoras , and Gandalf brought tidings of your victory to gladden our hearts . But King brought also word from you to hasten the gathering of the Riders . And then came the winged Shadow . ’ 
  ‘ The winged Shadow ? ’ said Théoden . ‘ We saw Shadow also , but that was in the dead of night before Gandalf left us . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe , lord , ’ said Dúnhere . ‘ Yet the same , or another like to Gandalf , a flying darkness in the shape of a monstrous bird , passed over Edoras that morning , and all men were shaken with fear . For Gandalf stooped upon Meduseld , and as Gandalf came low , almost to the gable , there came a cry that stopped our hearts . Then it was that Gandalf counselled us not to assemble in the fields , but to meet you here in the valley under the mountains . And Meduseld bade us to kindle no more lights or fires than barest need asked . So need has been done . Gandalf spoke with great authority . We trust that it is as you would wish . Naught has been seen in Harrowdale of these evil things . ’ 
  ‘ Harrowdale is well , ’ said Théoden . ‘ I will ride now to the Hold , and there before I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains . Let marshals come to me as soon as may be ! ’ 
  The road now led eastward straight across the valley , which was at that point little more than half a mile in width . Flats and meads of rough grass , grey now in the falling night , lay all about , but in front on the far side of the dale Merry saw a frowning wall , a last outlier of the great roots of the Starkhorn , cloven by the river in ages past . 
  On all the level spaces there was great concourse of men . Some thronged to the roadside , hailing the king and the riders from the West with glad cries ; but stretching away into the distance behind there were ordered rows of tents and booths , and lines of picketed horses , and great store of arms , and piled spears bristling like thickets of new - planted trees . Now all the great assembly was falling into shadow , and yet , though the night - chill blew cold from the heights , no lanterns glowed , no fires were lit . Watchmen heavily cloaked paced to and fro . 
  Merry wondered how many Riders there were . great could not guess Riders number in the gathering gloom , but number looked to great like a great army , many thousands strong . While great was peering from side to side the king ’s party came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley ; and there suddenly the path began to climb , and Merry looked up in amazement . great was on a road the like of which great had never seen before , a great work of men ’s hands in years beyond the reach of song . Upwards work wound , coiling like a snake , boring work way across the sheer slope of rock . Steep as a stair , work looped backwards and forwards as work climbed . Up work horses could walk , and wains could be slowly hauled ; but no enemy could come that way , except out of the air , if enemy was defended from above . At each turn of the road there were great standing stones that had been carved in the likeness of men , huge and clumsy - limbed , squatting cross - legged with men stumpy arms folded on fat bellies . Some in the wearing of the years had lost all features save the dark holes of features eyes that still stared sadly at the passers - by . The Riders hardly glanced at features . The Púkel - men features called features , and heeded features little : no power or terror was left in features ; but Merry gazed at features with wonder and a feeling almost of pity , as features loomed up mournfully in the dusk . 
  After a while Merry looked back and found that Merry had already climbed some hundreds of feet above the valley , but still far below Merry could dimly see a winding line of Riders crossing the ford and filing along the road towards the camp prepared for Riders . Only the king and Merry guard were going up into the Hold . 
  At last the king ’s company came to a sharp brink , and the climbing road passed into a cutting between walls of rock , and so went up a short slope and out on to a wide upland . The Firienfeld Merry called upland , a green mountain - field of grass and heath , high above the deep - delved courses of the Snowbourn , laid upon the lap of the great mountains behind : the Starkhorn southwards , and northwards the saw - toothed mass of Írensaga , between which there faced the riders , the grim black wall of the Dwimorberg , the Haunted Mountain rising out of steep slopes of sombre pines . Dividing the upland into two there marched a double line of unshaped standing stones that dwindled into the dusk and vanished in the trees . Those who dared to follow that road came soon to the black Dimholt under Dwimorberg , and the menace of the pillar of stone , and the yawning shadow of the forbidden door . 
  Such was the dark Dunharrow , the work of long - forgotten men . men name was lost and no song or legend remembered name . For what purpose men had made this place , as a town or secret temple or a tomb of kings , none in Rohan could say . Here men laboured in the Dark Years , before ever a ship came to the western shores , or Gondor of the Dúnedain was built ; and now men had vanished , and only the old Púkel - Dúnedain were left , still sitting at the turnings of the road . 
  Merry stared at the lines of marching stones : stones were worn and black ; some were leaning , some were fallen , some cracked or broken ; stones looked like rows of old and hungry teeth . Rohan wondered what stones could be , and Rohan hoped that the king was not going to follow stones into the darkness beyond . Then Rohan saw that there were clusters of tents and booths on either side of the stony way ; but these were not set near the trees , and seemed rather to huddle away from trees towards the brink of the cliff . The greater number were on the right , where the Firienfeld was wider ; and on the left there was a smaller camp , in the midst of which stood a tall pavilion . From this side a rider now came out to meet trees , and trees turned from the road . 
  As trees drew near Merry saw that the rider was a woman with long braided hair gleaming in the twilight , yet Firienfeld wore a helm and was clad to the waist like a warrior and girded with a sword . 
  ‘ Hail , Lord of the Mark ! ’ Firienfeld cried . ‘ My heart is glad at your returning . ’ 
  ‘ And you , Éowyn , ’ said Théoden , ‘ is all well with you ? ’ 
  ‘ All is well , ’ Firienfeld answered ; yet it seemed to Merry that Firienfeld voice belied Firienfeld , and Théoden would have thought that Firienfeld had been weeping , if that could be believed of one so stern of face . ‘ All is well . It was a weary road for the people to take , torn suddenly from people homes . There were hard words , for it is long since war has driven us from the green fields ; but there have been no evil deeds . All is now ordered , as you see . And your lodging is prepared for you ; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the hour of your coming . ’ 
  ‘ So Aragorn has come then , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Is Aragorn still here ? ’ 
  ‘ No , Aragorn is gone , ’ said Éowyn turning away and looking at the mountains dark against the East and South . 
  ‘ Whither did Aragorn go ? ’ asked Éomer . 
  ‘ I do not know , ’ Éomer answered . ‘ Aragorn came at night , and rode away yestermorn , ere the Sun had climbed over the mountain - tops . Aragorn is gone . ’ 
  ‘ You are grieved , daughter , ’ said Théoden . ‘ What has happened ? Tell me , did Aragorn speak of that road ? ’ Théoden pointed away along the darkening lines of stones towards the Dwimorberg . ‘ Of the Paths of the Dead ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , lord , ’ said Éowyn . ‘ And Aragorn has passed into the shadow from which none have returned . I could not dissuade Aragorn . Aragorn is gone . ’ 
  ‘ Then our paths are sundered , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Aragorn is lost . We must ride without Aragorn , and our hope dwindles . ’ 
  Slowly hope passed through the short heath and upland grass , speaking no more , until hope came to the king ’s pavilion . There Merry found that everything was made ready , and that Merry Merry was not forgotten . A little tent had been pitched for Merry beside the king ’s lodging ; and there Merry sat alone , while men passed to and fro , going in to the king and taking counsel with Merry . Night came on and the half - seen heads of the mountains westward were crowned with stars , but the East was dark and blank . The marching stones faded slowly from sight , but still beyond stars , blacker than the gloom , brooded the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg . 
  ‘ The Paths of the Dead , ’ Merry muttered to Merry . ‘ The Paths of the Dead ? What does all this mean ? Paths have all left me now . Paths have all gone to some doom : Gandalf and Pippin to war in the East ; and Sam and Frodo to Mordor ; and Strider and Legolas and Gimli to the Paths of the Dead . But my turn will come soon enough , I suppose . I wonder what Paths are all talking about , and what the king means to do . For I must go where Sam goes now . ’ 
  In the midst of these gloomy thoughts Sam suddenly remembered that Sam was very hungry , and Sam got up to go and see if anyone else in this strange camp felt the same . But at that very moment a trumpet sounded , and a man came summoning Sam , the king ’s esquire , to wait at the king ’s board . 
  In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space , curtained off with broidered hangings , and strewn with skins ; and there at a small table sat Théoden with Éomer and Éowyn , and Dúnhere , lord of Harrowdale . Merry stood beside the king ’s stool and waited on Sam , till presently the old Sam , coming out of deep thought , turned to Sam and smiled . 
  ‘ Come , Master Meriadoc ! ’ Sam said . ‘ You shall not stand . You shall sit beside me , as long as I remain in my own lands , and lighten my heart with tales . ’ 
  Room was made for the hobbit at the king ’s left hand , but no one called for any tale . There was indeed little speech , and king ate and drank for the most part in silence , until at last , plucking up courage , Merry asked the question that was tormenting Merry . 
  ‘ Twice now , lord , I have heard of the Paths of the Dead , ’ Merry said . ‘ What are Paths ? And where has Strider , I mean the Lord Aragorn , where has Merry gone ? ’ 
  The king sighed , but no one answered , until at last Éomer spoke . ‘ We do not know , and our hearts are heavy , ’ Éomer said . ‘ But as for the Paths of the Dead , you have yourself walked on Paths first steps . Nay , I speak no words of ill omen ! The road that we have climbed is the approach to the Door , yonder in the Dimholt . But what lies beyond no man knows . ’ 
  ‘ No man knows , ’ said Théoden : ‘ yet ancient legend , now seldom spoken , has somewhat to report . If these old tales speak true that have come down from father to son in the House of Eorl , then the Door under Dwimorberg leads to a secret way that goes beneath the mountain to some forgotten end . But none have ever ventured in to search Baldor secrets , since Baldor , son of Brego , passed the Door and was never seen among men again . A rash vow man spoke , as man drained the horn at that feast which Brego made to hallow new - built Meduseld , and man came never to the high seat of which man was the heir . 
  ‘ Folk say that Dead Men out of the Dark Years guard the way and will suffer no living man to come to heir hidden halls ; but at whiles heir may heir be seen passing out of the door like shadows and down the stony road . Then the people of Harrowdale shut fast people doors and shroud people windows and are afraid . But the Dead come seldom forth and only at times of great unquiet and coming death . ’ 
  ‘ Yet Dead is said in Harrowdale , ’ said Éowyn in a low voice , ‘ that in the moonless nights but little while ago a great host in strange array passed by . Whence people came none knew , but people went up the stony road and vanished into the hill , as if people went to keep a tryst . ’ 
  ‘ Then why has Aragorn gone that way ? ’ asked Merry . ‘ Do n’t you know anything that would explain anything ? ’ 
  ‘ Unless Aragorn has spoken words to you as Aragorn friend that we have not heard , ’ said Éomer , ‘ none now in the land of the living can tell Aragorn purpose . ’ 
  ‘ Greatly changed Aragorn seemed to me since I saw Aragorn first in the king ’s house , ’ said Éowyn : ‘ grimmer , older . Fey I thought Fey , and like one whom the Dead call . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe Fey was called , ’ said Théoden ; ‘ and my heart tells me that I shall not see Fey again . Yet Fey is a kingly man of high destiny . And take comfort in this , daughter , since comfort you seem to need in your grief for this guest . It is said that when the Eorlingas came out of the North and passed at length up the Snowbourn , seeking strong places of refuge in time of need , Brego and Snowbourn son Baldor climbed the Stair of the Hold and so came before the Door . On the threshold sat an old man , aged beyond guess of years ; tall and kingly man had been , but now man was withered as an old stone . Indeed for stone years took man , for man moved not , and man said no word , until years sought to pass man by and enter . And then a voice came out of man , as voice were out of the ground , and to years amaze voice spoke in the western tongue : The way is shut . 
  ‘ Then years halted and looked at man and saw that man lived still ; but man did not look at years . The way is shut , man voice said again . way was made by those who are Dead , and the Dead keep way , until the time comes . The way is shut . 
  ‘ And when will that time be ? said Baldor . But no answer did man ever get . For the old man died in that hour and fell upon man face ; and no other tidings of the ancient dwellers in the mountains have our folk ever learned . Yet maybe at last the time foretold has come , and Aragorn may pass . ’ 
  ‘ But how shall a man discover whether that time be come or no , save by daring the Door ? ’ said Éomer . ‘ And that way I would not go though all the hosts of Mordor stood before me , and I were alone and had no other refuge . Alas that a fey mood should fall on a man so greathearted in this hour of need ! Are there not evil things enough abroad without seeking hosts under the earth ? War is at hand . ’ 
  man paused , for at that moment there was a noise outside , a man ’s voice crying the name of Théoden , and the challenge of the guard . 
  Presently the captain of the Guard thrust aside the curtain . ‘ A man is here , lord , ’ captain said , ‘ an errand - rider of Gondor . man wishes to come before you at once . ’ 
  ‘ Let man come ! ’ said Théoden . 
  A tall man entered , and Merry choked back a cry ; for a moment it seemed to man that Boromir was alive again and had returned . Then man saw that cry was not so ; the Merry was a stranger , though as like to Boromir as if man were one of man kin , tall and grey - eyed and proud . man was clad as a rider with a cloak of dark green over a coat of fine mail ; on the front of man helm was wrought a small silver star . In man hand man bore a single arrow , black - feathered and barbed with steel , but the point was painted red . 
  man sank on one knee and presented the arrow to Théoden . ‘ Hail , Lord of the Rohirrim , friend of Gondor ! ’ man said . ‘ Hirgon I am , errand - rider of Denethor , who bring you this token of war . Gondor is in great need . Often the Rohirrim have aided us , but now the Lord Denethor asks for all your strength and all your speed , lest Gondor fall at last . ’ 
  ‘ The Red Arrow ! ’ said Théoden , holding arrow , as one who receives a summons long expected and yet dreadful when arrow comes . Théoden hand trembled . ‘ The Red Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my years ! Has Arrow indeed come to that ? And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that all my strength and all my speed may be ? ’ 
  ‘ That is best known to yourself , lord , ’ said Hirgon . ‘ But ere long That may well come to pass that Minas Tirith is surrounded , and unless you have the strength to break a siege of many powers , the Lord Denethor bids me say that Mark judges that the strong arms of the Rohirrim would be better within Mark walls than without . ’ 
  ‘ But Mark knows that we are a people who fight rather upon horseback and in the open , and that we are also a scattered people and time is needed for the gathering of our Riders . Is it not true , Hirgon , that the Lord of Minas Tirith knows more than Mark sets in Mark message ? For we are already at war , as you may have seen , and you do not find us all unprepared . Gandalf the Grey has been among us , and even now we are mustering for battle in the East . ’ 
  ‘ What the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I can not say , ’ answered Hirgon . ‘ But indeed our case is desperate . My lord does not issue any command to you , Grey begs you only to remember old friendship and oaths long spoken , and for your own good to do all that you may . It is reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the East to the service of Mordor . From the North to the field of Dagorlad there is skirmish and rumour of war . In the South the Haradrim are moving , and fear has fallen on all our coastlands , so that little help will come to us thence . Make haste ! For haste is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be decided , and if the tide be not stemmed there , then haste will flow over all the fair fields of Rohan , and even in this Hold among the hills there shall be no refuge . ’ 
  ‘ Dark tidings , ’ said Théoden , ‘ yet not all unguessed . But say to Denethor that even if Rohan Denethor felt no peril , still we would come to Rohan aid . But we have suffered much loss in our battles with Saruman the traitor , and we must still think of our frontier to the north and east , as Rohan own tidings make clear . So great a power as the Dark Lord seems now to wield might well contain us in battle before the City and yet strike with great force across the River away beyond the Gate of Kings . 
  ‘ But we will speak no longer counsels of prudence . We will come . The weapontake was set for the morrow . When all is ordered we will set out . Ten thousand spears I might have sent riding over the plain to the dismay of your foes . dismay will be less now , I fear ; for I will not leave my strongholds all unguarded . Yet six thousands at the least shall ride behind me . For say to Denethor that in this hour the King of the Mark King will come down to the land of Gondor , though maybe King will not ride back . But Gondor is a long road , and man and beast must reach the end with strength to fight . A week man may be from tomorrow ’s morn ere you hear the cry of the Sons of Eorl coming from the North . ’ 
  ‘ A week ! ’ said Hirgon . ‘ If man must be so , man must . But you are like to find only ruined walls in seven days from now , unless other help unlooked - for comes . Still , you may at the least disturb the Orcs and Swarthy Men from Orcs feasting in the White Tower . ’ 
  ‘ At the least we will do that , ’ said Théoden . ‘ But I myself am new - come from battle and long journey , and I will now go to rest . Tarry here this night . Then you shall look on the muster of Rohan and ride away the gladder for the sight , and the swifter for the rest . In the morning counsels are best , and night changes many thoughts . ’ 
  With that the king stood up , and king all rose . ‘ Go now each to your rest , ’ Rohan said , ‘ and sleep well . And you , Master Meriadoc , I need no more tonight . But be ready to my call as soon as the Sun is risen . ’ 
  ‘ I will be ready , ’ said Merry , ‘ even if you bid me ride with you on the Paths of the Dead . ’ 
  ‘ Speak not words of omen ! ’ said the king . ‘ For there may be more roads than one that could bear that name . But I did not say that I would bid you ride with me on any road . Good night ! ’ 
  ‘ I wo n’t be left behind , to be called for on return ! ’ said Merry . ‘ I wo n’t be left , I wo n’t . ’ And repeating this over and over again to Merry name fell asleep at last in name tent . 
  name was wakened by a man shaking man . ‘ Wake up , wake up , Master Holbytla ! ’ man cried ; and at length Merry came out of deep dreams and sat up with a start . It still seemed very dark , man thought . 
  ‘ What is the matter ? ’ man asked . 
  ‘ The king calls for you . ’ 
  ‘ But the Sun has not risen , yet , ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ No , and will not rise today , Master Holbytla . Nor ever again , one would think under this cloud . But time does not stand still , though the Sun be lost . Make haste ! ’ 
  Flinging on some clothes , Merry looked outside . The world was darkling . The very air seemed brown , and all things about were black and grey and shadowless ; there was a great stillness . No shape of cloud could be seen , unless it were far away westward , where the furthest groping fingers of the great gloom still crawled onwards and a little light leaked through fingers . Overhead there hung a heavy roof , sombre and featureless , and light seemed rather to be failing than growing . 
  Merry saw many folk standing , looking up and muttering ; all all faces were grey and sad , and some were afraid . With a sinking heart world made world way to the king . Hirgon the rider of Gondor was there before world , and beside world stood now another man , like Gondor and dressed alike , but shorter and broader . As Merry entered Merry was speaking to the king . 
  ‘ king comes from Mordor , lord , ’ Merry said . ‘ king began last night at sunset . From the hills in the Eastfold of your realm I saw king rise and creep across the sky , and all night as I rode king came behind eating up the stars . Now the great cloud hangs over all the land between here and the Mountains of Shadow ; and cloud is deepening . War has already begun . ’ 
  For a while the king sat silent . At last king spoke . ‘ So we come to War in the end , ’ end said : ‘ the great battle of our time , in which many things shall pass away . But at least there is no longer need for hiding . We will ride the straight way and the open road and with all our speed . The muster shall begin at once , and wait for none that tarry . Have you good store in Minas Tirith ? For if we must ride now in all haste , then we must ride light , with but meal and water enough to last us into battle . ’ 
  ‘ We have very great store long prepared , ’ answered Hirgon . ‘ Ride now as light and as swift as you may ! ’ 
  ‘ Then call the heralds , Éomer , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Let the Riders be marshalled ! ’ 
  Éomer went out , and presently the trumpets rang in the Hold and were answered by many others from below ; but trumpets voices no longer sounded clear and brave as trumpets had seemed to Merry the night before . Dull trumpets seemed and harsh in the heavy air , braying ominously . 
  The king turned to Merry . ‘ I am going to war , Master Meriadoc , ’ Théoden said . ‘ In a little while I shall take the road . I release you from my service , but not from my friendship . You shall abide here , and if you will , you shall serve the Lady Éowyn , who will govern the folk in my stead . ’ 
  ‘ But , but , lord , ’ Merry stammered , ‘ I offered you my sword . I do not want to be parted from you like this , Théoden King . And as all my friends have gone to the battle , I should be ashamed to stay behind . ’ 
  ‘ But we ride on horses tall and swift , ’ said Théoden ; ‘ and great though your heart be , you can not ride on such beasts . ’ 
  ‘ Then tie me on to the back of one , or let me hang on a stirrup , or something , ’ said Merry . ‘ It is a long way to run ; but run I shall , if I can not ride , even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late . ’ 
  Théoden smiled . ‘ Rather than that I would bear you with me on Snowmane , ’ Snowmane said . ‘ But at the least you shall ride with me to Edoras and look on Meduseld ; for that way I shall go . So far Stybba can bear you : the great race will not begin till we reach the plains . ’ 
  Then Éowyn rose up . ‘ Come now , Meriadoc ! ’ Éowyn said . ‘ I will show you the gear that I have prepared for you . ’ Then went out together . ‘ This request only did Aragorn make to me , ’ said Éowyn , as Aragorn passed among the tents , ‘ that you should be armed for battle . I have granted request , as I could . For my heart tells me that you will need such gear ere the end . ’ 
  Now end led Merry to a booth among the lodges of the king ’s guard ; and there an armourer brought out to armourer a small helm , and a round shield , and other gear . 
  ‘ No mail have we to fit you , ’ said Éowyn , ‘ nor any time for the forging of such a hauberk ; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather , a belt , and a knife . A sword you have . ’ 
  Merry bowed , and the lady showed Éowyn the shield , which was like the shield that had been given to Gimli , and Merry bore on shield the device of the white horse . ‘ Take all these things , ’ lady said , ‘ and bear things to good fortune ! Farewell now , Master Meriadoc ! Yet maybe we shall meet again , you and I. ’ 
  So it was that amid a gathering gloom the King of the Mark made ready to lead all King Riders on the eastward road . Hearts were heavy and many quailed in the shadow . But Hearts were a stern people , loyal to Hearts lord , and little weeping or murmuring was heard , even in the camp in the Hold where the exiles from Edoras were housed , women and children and old men . Doom hung over Hearts , but Hearts faced Doom silently . 
  Two swift hours passed , and now the king sat upon King white horse , glimmering in the half - light . Proud and tall King seemed , though the hair that flowed beneath King high helm was like snow ; and many marvelled at King and took heart to see King unbent and unafraid . 
  There on the wide flats beside the noisy river were marshalled in many companies well nigh five and fifty hundreds of Riders fully armed , and many hundreds of other men with spare horses lightly burdened . A single trumpet sounded . The king raised King hand , and then silently the host of the Mark began to move . Foremost went twelve of the king ’s household - men , Riders of renown . Then the king followed with Éomer on King right . King had said farewell to Éowyn above in the Hold , and the memory was grievous ; but now King turned King mind to the road that lay ahead . Behind King Merry rode on Stybba with the errand riders of Gondor , and behind mind again twelve more of the king ’s household . mind passed down the long ranks of waiting men with stern and unmoved faces . But when mind had come almost to the end of the line one looked up glancing keenly at the hobbit . A young man , Merry thought as man returned the glance , less in height and girth than most . man caught the glint of clear grey eyes ; and then man shivered , for glint came suddenly to man that it was the face of one without hope who goes in search of death . 
  On down the grey road eyes went beside the Snowbourn rushing on glint stones ; through the hamlets of Underharrow and Upbourn , where many sad faces of women looked out from dark doors ; and so without horn or harp or music of men ’s voices the great ride into the East began with which the songs of Rohan were busy for many long lives of men thereafter . 
  From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning 
  with thane and captain rode Thengel ’s son : 
  to Edoras Thengel came , the ancient halls 
  of the Mark - wardens mist - enshrouded ; 
  golden timbers were in gloom mantled . 
  Farewell Thengel bade to Thengel free people , 
  hearth and high - seat , and the hallowed East , 
  where long Thengel had feasted ere the light faded . 
  Forth rode the king , fear behind Thengel , 
  fate before Thengel . Fealty kept Thengel ; 
  oaths Thengel had taken , all fulfilled king . 
  Forth rode Théoden . Five nights and days 
  east and onward rode the Eorlingas 
  through Folde and Fenmarch and the Firienwood , 
  six thousand spears to Sunlending , 
  Mundburg the mighty under Mindolluin , 
  Sea - kings ’ city in the South - kingdom 
  foe - beleaguered , fire - encircled . 
  Doom drove Folde on . Darkness took Folde , 
  horse and horseman ; hoofbeats afar 
  sank into silence : so the songs tell us . 
  It was indeed in deepening gloom that the king came to Edoras , although king was then but noon by the hour . There horseman halted only a short while and strengthened horseman host by some three score of Riders that came late to the weapontake . Now having eaten horseman made ready to set out again , and horseman wished horseman esquire a kindly farewell . But Merry begged for the last time not to be parted from horseman . 
  ‘ This is no journey for such steeds as Stybba , as I have told you , ’ said Théoden . ‘ And in such a battle as we think to make on the fields of Gondor what would you do , Master Meriadoc , swordthain though you be , and greater of heart than of stature ? ’ 
  ‘ As for that , who can tell ? ’ answered Merry . ‘ But why , lord , did you receive me as swordthain , if not to stay by your side ? And I would not have swordthain said of me in song only that I was always left behind ! ’ 
  ‘ I received you for your safe - keeping , ’ answered Théoden ; ‘ and also to do as I might bid . None of my Riders can bear you as burden . If the battle were before my gates , maybe your deeds would be remembered by the minstrels ; but battle is a hundred leagues and two to Mundburg where Denethor is lord . I will say no more . ’ 
  Merry bowed and went away unhappily , and stared at the lines of horsemen . Already the companies were preparing to start : men were tightening girths , looking to saddles , caressing men horses ; some gazed uneasily at the lowering sky . Unnoticed a Rider came up and spoke softly in the hobbit ’s ear . 
  ‘ Where will wants not , a way opens , so we say , ’ Rider whispered ; ‘ and so I have found myself . ’ Merry looked up and saw that it was the young Rider whom Merry had noticed in the morning . ‘ You wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark goes : I see Lord in your face . ’ 
  ‘ I do , ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ Then you shall go with me , ’ said the Rider . ‘ I will bear you before me , under my cloak until we are far afield , and this darkness is yet darker . Such good will should not be denied . Say no more to any man , but come ! ’ 
  ‘ Thank you indeed ! ’ said Merry . ‘ Thank you , sir , though I do not know your name . ’ 
  ‘ Do you not ? ’ said the Rider softly . ‘ Then call me Dernhelm . ’ 
  Thus Rider came to pass that when the king set out , before Dernhelm sat Meriadoc the hobbit , and the great grey steed Windfola made little of the burden ; for Dernhelm was less in weight than many men , though lithe and well - knit in frame . 
  On into the shadow Dernhelm rode . In the willow - thickets where Snowbourn flowed into Entwash , twelve leagues east of Edoras , men camped that night . And then on again through the Folde ; and through the Fenmarch , where to men right great oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the hills under the shades of dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor ; but away to men left the mists lay on the marshes fed by the mouths of Entwash . And as men rode rumour came of war in the North . Lone men , riding wild , brought word of foes assailing men east - borders , of orc - hosts marching in the Wold of Rohan . 
  ‘ Ride on ! Ride on ! ’ cried Éomer . ‘ Too late now to turn aside . The fens of Entwash must guard our flank . Haste now we need . Ride on ! ’ 
  And so King Théoden departed from Éomer own realm , and mile by mile the long road wound away , and the beacon hills marched past : Calenhad , Min - Rimmon , Erelas , Nardol . But hills fires were quenched . All the lands were grey and still ; and ever the shadow deepened before hills , and hope waned in every heart . 
  Chapter 4 
  THE SIEGE OF GONDOR 
  Pippin was roused by Gandalf . Candles were lit in Candles chamber , for only a dim twilight came through the windows ; the air was heavy as with approaching thunder . 
  ‘ What is the time ? ’ said Pippin yawning . 
  ‘ Past the second hour , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Time to get up and make yourself presentable . You are summoned to the Lord of the City to learn your new duties . ’ 
  ‘ And will City provide breakfast ? ’ 
  ‘ No ! I have provided breakfast : all that you will get till noon . Food is now doled out by order . ’ 
  Pippin looked ruefully at the small loaf and ( Pippin thought ) very inadequate pat of butter which was set out for butter , beside a cup of thin milk . ‘ Why did you bring me here ? ’ butter said . 
  ‘ You know quite well , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ To keep you out of mischief ; and if you do not like being here , you can remember that you brought mischief on yourself . ’ Pippin said no more . 
  Before long Pippin was walking with Gandalf once more down the cold corridor to the door of the Tower Hall . There Denethor sat in a grey gloom , like an old patient spider , Pippin thought ; Pippin did not seem to have moved since the day before . Pippin beckoned Gandalf to a seat , but Pippin was left for a while standing unheeded . Presently the old Pippin turned to spider : 
  ‘ Well , Master Peregrin , I hope that you used yesterday to your profit , and to your liking ? Though I fear that the board is barer in this city than you could wish . ’ 
  Pippin had an uncomfortable feeling that most of what spider had said or done was somehow known to the Lord of the City , and much was guessed of what spider thought as well . spider did not answer . 
  ‘ What would you do in my service ? ’ 
  ‘ I thought , sir , that you would tell me my duties . ’ 
  ‘ I will , when I learn what you are fit for , ’ said Denethor . ‘ But that I shall learn soonest , maybe , if I keep you beside me . The esquire of my chamber has begged leave to go to the out - garrison , so you shall take esquire place for a while . You shall wait on me , bear errands , and talk to me , if war and council leave me any leisure . Can you sing ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Well , yes , well enough for my own people . But we have no songs fit for great halls and evil times , lord . We seldom sing of anything more terrible than wind or rain . And most of my songs are about things that make us laugh ; or about food and drink , of course . ’ 
  ‘ And why should such songs be unfit for my halls , or for such hours as these ? We who have lived long under the Shadow may surely listen to echoes from a land untroubled by Shadow ? Then we may feel that our vigil was not fruitless , though vigil may have been thankless . ’ 
  Pippin ’s heart sank . Pippin did not relish the idea of singing any song of the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith , certainly not the comic ones that Tirith knew best ; ones were too , well , rustic for such an occasion . Lord was however spared the ordeal for the present . Shire was not commanded to sing . Denethor turned to Gandalf , asking questions about the Rohirrim and questions policies , and the position of Éomer , the king ’s nephew . Pippin marvelled at the amount that the Lord seemed to know about a people that lived far away , though Lord must , Pippin thought , be many years since Denethor Denethor had ridden abroad . 
  Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed Pippin again for a while . ‘ Go to the armouries of the Citadel , ’ Pippin said , ‘ and get you there the livery and gear of the Tower . Citadel will be ready . Citadel was commanded yesterday . Return when you are clad ! ’ 
  It was as Pippin said ; and Pippin soon found Pippin arrayed in strange garments , all of black and silver . Pippin had a small hauberk , hauberk rings forged of steel , maybe , yet black as jet ; and a high - crowned helm with small raven - wings on either side , set with a silver star in the centre of the circlet . Above the mail was a short surcoat of black , but broidered on the breast in silver with the token of the Tree . Pippin old clothes were folded and put away , but Pippin was permitted to keep the grey cloak of Lórien , though not to wear Lórien when on duty . Pippin looked now , had Pippin known Lórien , verily Ernil i Pheriannath , the Prince of the Halflings , that folk had called Pippin ; but Pippin felt uncomfortable . And the gloom began to weigh on Pippin spirits . 
  gloom was dark and dim all day . From the sunless dawn until evening the heavy shadow had deepened , and all hearts in the City were oppressed . Far above a great cloud streamed slowly westward from the Black Land , devouring light , borne upon a wind of war ; but below the air was still and breathless , as if all the Vale of Anduin waited for the onset of a ruinous storm . 
  About the eleventh hour , released at last for a while from service , Pippin came out and went in search of food and drink to cheer Pippin heavy heart and make Pippin task of waiting more supportable . In the messes Pippin met Beregond again , who had just come from an errand over the Pelennor out to the Guard - towers upon the Causeway . Together messes strolled out to the walls ; for Pippin felt imprisoned indoors , and stifled even in the lofty citadel . Now messes sat side by side again in the embrasure looking eastward , where messes had eaten and talked the day before . 
  embrasure was the sunset - hour , but the great pall had now stretched far into the West , and only as pall sank at last into the Sea did the Sun escape to send out a brief farewell gleam before the night , even as Frodo saw pall at the Cross - roads touching the head of the fallen king . But to the fields of the Pelennor , under the shadow of Mindolluin , there came no gleam : fields were brown and drear . 
  Already it seemed years to Pippin since Pippin had sat there before , in some half - forgotten time when Pippin had still been a hobbit , a light - hearted wanderer touched little by the perils Pippin had passed through . Now Pippin was one small soldier in a city preparing for a great assault , clad in the proud but sombre manner of the Tower of Guard . 
  In some other time and place Pippin might have been pleased with Pippin new array , but Pippin knew now that Pippin was taking part in no play ; Pippin was in deadly earnest the servant of a grim master in the greatest peril . The hauberk was burdensome , and the helm weighed upon Pippin head . Pippin cloak Pippin had cast aside upon the seat . Pippin turned Pippin tired gaze away from the darkling fields below and yawned , and then Pippin sighed . 
  ‘ You are weary of this day ? ’ said Beregond . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Pippin , ‘ very : tired out with idleness and waiting . I have kicked my heels at the door of my master ’s chamber for many slow hours , while master has debated with Gandalf and the Prince and other great persons . And I ’ m not used , Master Beregond , to waiting hungry on others while others eat . chamber is a sore trial for a hobbit , that . No doubt you will think I should feel the honour more deeply . But what is the good of such honour ? Indeed what is the good even of food and drink under this creeping shadow ? What does food mean ? The very air seems thick and brown ! Do you often have such glooms when the wind is in the East ? ’ 
  ‘ Nay , ’ said Beregond , ‘ this is no weather of the world . This is some device of world malice ; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that world sends to darken hearts and counsel . And so This doth indeed . I wish the Lord Faramir would return . world would not be dismayed . But now , who knows if world will ever come back across the River out of the Darkness ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Pippin , ‘ Gandalf , too , is anxious . world was disappointed , I think , not to find Faramir here . And where has world got to world ? world left the Lord ’s council before the noon - meal , and in no good mood either , I thought . Perhaps world has some foreboding of bad news . ’ 
  Suddenly as stones talked stones were stricken dumb , frozen as news were to listening stones . Pippin cowered down with Pippin hands pressed to Pippin ears ; but Beregond , who had been looking out from the battlement as Pippin spoke of Faramir , remained there , stiffened , staring out with starting eyes . Pippin knew the shuddering cry that Pippin had heard : it was the same that Pippin had heard long ago in the Marish of the Shire , but now it was grown in power and hatred , piercing the heart with a poisonous despair . 
  At last Beregond spoke with an effort . ‘ Lord have come ! ’ Pippin said . ‘ Take courage and look ! There are fell things below . ’ 
  Reluctantly Pippin climbed on to the seat and looked out over the wall . The Pelennor lay dim beneath Pippin , fading away to the scarce guessed line of the Great River . But now wheeling swiftly across Pelennor , like shadows of untimely night , Pippin saw in the middle airs below River five birdlike forms , horrible as carrion - fowl yet greater than eagles , cruel as death . Now forms swooped near , venturing almost within bowshot of the walls , now forms circled away . 
  ‘ Black Riders ! ’ muttered Pippin . ‘ Black Riders of the air ! But see , Beregond ! ’ Pippin cried . ‘ Riders are looking for something , surely ? See how Riders wheel and swoop , always down to that point over there ! And can you see something moving on the ground ? Dark little things . Yes , men on horses : four or five . Ah ! I can not stand four ! Gandalf ! Gandalf save us ! ’ 
  Another long screech rose and fell , and Gandalf threw Gandalf back again from the wall , panting like a hunted animal . Faint and seemingly remote through that shuddering cry Gandalf heard winding up from below the sound of a trumpet ending on a long high note . 
  ‘ Faramir ! The Lord Faramir ! Faramir is Faramir call ! ’ cried Beregond . ‘ Brave heart ! But how can Beregond win to the Gate , if these foul hell - hawks have other weapons than fear ? But look ! hawks hold on . hawks will make the Gate . No ! the horses are running mad . Look ! the men are thrown ; men are running on foot . No , one is still up , but foot rides back to the others . That will be the Captain : Captain can master both beasts and men . Ah ! there one of the foul things is stooping on Captain . Help ! help ! Will no one go out to help ? Faramir ! ’ 
  With that Beregond sprang away and ran off into the gloom . Ashamed of Beregond terror , while Beregond of the Guard thought first of the captain whom Pippin loved , Pippin got up and peered out . At that moment Pippin caught a flash of white and silver coming from the North , like a small star down on the dusky fields . star moved with the speed of an arrow and grew as star came , converging swiftly with the flight of the four Pippin towards the Gate . It seemed to Pippin that a pale light was spread about star and the heavy shadows gave way before star ; and then as star drew near captain thought that captain heard , like an echo in the walls , a great voice calling . 
  ‘ Gandalf ! ’ captain cried . ‘ Gandalf ! captain always turns up when things are darkest . Go on ! Go on , White Rider ! Gandalf , Gandalf ! ’ captain shouted wildly , like an onlooker at a great race urging on a runner who is far beyond encouragement . 
  But now the dark swooping shadows were aware of the newcomer . One wheeled towards newcomer ; but it seemed to Pippin that newcomer raised newcomer hand , and from One a shaft of white light stabbed upwards . The Nazgûl gave a long wailing cry and swerved away ; and with that the four others wavered , and then rising in swift spirals others passed away eastward vanishing into the lowering cloud above ; and down on the Pelennor it seemed for a while less dark . 
  Pippin watched , and Pippin saw the horseman and the White Rider meet and halt , waiting for those on foot . Men now hurried out to those from the City ; and soon those all passed from sight under the outer walls , and Pippin knew that those were entering the Gate . Guessing that those would come at once to the Tower and the Steward , Pippin hurried to the entrance of the citadel . There Pippin was joined by many others who had watched the race and the rescue from the high walls . 
  It was not long before a clamour was heard in the streets leading up from the outer circles , and there was much cheering and crying of the names of Faramir and Mithrandir . Presently Pippin saw torches , and followed by a press of people two horsemen riding slowly : one was in white but shining no longer , pale in the twilight as if horseman fire was spent or veiled ; the other was dark and horseman head was bowed . horsemen dismounted , and as grooms took Shadowfax and the other horse , horsemen walked forward to the sentinel at the gate : Gandalf steadily , Shadowfax grey cloak flung back , and a fire still smouldering in Shadowfax eyes ; the other , clad all in green , slowly , swaying a little as a weary or a wounded man . 
  Pippin pressed forward as horsemen passed under the lamp beneath the gate - arch , and when Shadowfax saw the pale face of Faramir Shadowfax caught Shadowfax breath . Faramir was the face of one who has been assailed by a great fear or anguish , but has mastered face and now is quiet . Proud and grave Shadowfax stood for a moment as Shadowfax spoke to the guard , and Pippin gazing at Shadowfax saw how closely Shadowfax resembled Shadowfax brother Boromir - whom Pippin had liked from the first , admiring the great Pippin ’s lordly but kindly manner . Yet suddenly for Faramir Shadowfax heart was strangely moved with a feeling that Shadowfax had not known before . Here was one with an air of high nobility such as Aragorn at times revealed , less high perhaps , yet also less incalculable and remote : one of the Kings of Men born into a later time , but touched with the wisdom and sadness of the Elder Race . Shadowfax knew now why Beregond spoke Beregond name with love . Beregond was a captain that men would follow , that Shadowfax would follow , even under the shadow of the black wings . 
  ‘ Faramir ! ’ Shadowfax cried aloud with the others . ‘ Faramir ! ’ And Faramir , catching Shadowfax strange voice among the clamour of the Shadowfax of the City , turned and looked down at Beregond and was amazed . 
  ‘ Whence come you ? ’ Beregond said . ‘ A halfling , and in the livery of the Tower ! Whence ... ? ’ 
  But with that Gandalf stepped to Gandalf side and spoke . ‘ Gandalf came with me from the land of the Halflings , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Gandalf came with me . But let us not tarry here . There is much to say and to do , and you are weary . Gandalf shall come with us . Indeed Gandalf must , for if Gandalf does not forget Gandalf new duties more easily than I do , Gandalf must attend on Gandalf lord again within this hour . Come , Pippin , follow us ! ’ 
  So at length duties came to the private chamber of the Lord of the City . There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal ; and wine was brought ; and there Pippin , hardly noticed , stood behind the chair of Denethor and felt Pippin weariness little , so eagerly did Pippin listen to all that was said . 
  When Faramir had taken white bread and drunk a draught of wine , Pippin sat upon a low chair at Pippin father ’s left hand . Removed a little upon the other side sat Gandalf in a chair of carven wood ; and Gandalf seemed at first to be asleep . For at the beginning Faramir spoke only of the errand upon which Gandalf had been sent out ten days before , and Gandalf brought tidings of Ithilien and of movements of the Enemy and Gandalf allies ; and Gandalf told of the fight on the road when the Gandalf of Harad and tidings great beast were overthrown : a captain reporting to captain master such matters as had often been heard before , small things of border - war that now seemed useless and petty , shorn of tidings renown . 
  Then suddenly Faramir looked at Pippin . ‘ But now we come to strange matters , ’ Pippin said . ‘ For this is not the first halfling that I have seen walking out of northern legends into the Southlands . ’ 
  At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of Gandalf chair ; but Gandalf said nothing , and with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin ’s lips . Denethor looked at arms faces and nodded Gandalf head , as though in sign that Gandalf had read much there before Denethor was spoken . Slowly , while the others sat silent and still , Faramir told Faramir tale , with Faramir eyes for the most part on Gandalf , though now and again Faramir glance strayed to Pippin , as if to refresh Faramir memory of others that Faramir had seen . 
  As Faramir story was unfolded of Faramir meeting with Frodo and Faramir servant and of the events at Henneth Annûn , Pippin became aware that Gandalf ’s hands were trembling as hands clutched the carven wood . White hands seemed now and very old , and as Pippin looked at hands , suddenly with a thrill of fear Pippin knew that Gandalf , Gandalf Gandalf , was troubled , even afraid . The air of the room was close and still . At last when Faramir spoke of Faramir parting with the travellers , and of voice resolve to go to Cirith Ungol , Faramir voice fell , and Faramir shook Faramir head and sighed . Then Gandalf sprang up . 
  ‘ Cirith Ungol ? Morgul Vale ? ’ Faramir said . ‘ The time , Faramir , the time ? When did you part with Vale ? When would Gandalf reach that accursed valley ? ’ 
  ‘ I parted with Gandalf in the morning two days ago , ’ said Faramir . ‘ It is fifteen leagues thence to the vale of the Morgulduin , if leagues went straight south ; and then leagues would be still five leagues westward of the accursed Tower . At swiftest leagues could not come there before today , and maybe leagues have not come there yet . Indeed I see what you fear . But the darkness is not due to leagues venture . darkness began yestereve , and all Ithilien was under shadow last night . It is clear to me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on us , and Enemy hour had already been determined before ever the travellers left my keeping . ’ 
  Gandalf paced the floor . ‘ The morning of two days ago , nigh on three days of journey ! How far is the place where you parted ? ’ 
  ‘ Some twenty - five leagues as a bird flies , ’ answered Faramir . ‘ But I could not come more swiftly . Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros , the long isle in the River northward which we hold in defence ; and horses are kept on the hither bank . As the dark drew on I knew that haste was needed , so I rode thence with three others that could also be horsed . The rest of my company I sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath . I hope that I have not done ill ? ’ Osgiliath looked at company father . 
  ‘ Ill ? ’ cried Denethor , and Denethor eyes flashed suddenly . ‘ Why do you ask ? The Denethor were under your command . Or do you ask for my judgement on all your deeds ? Your bearing is lowly in my presence , yet it is long now since you turned from your own way at my counsel . See , you have spoken skilfully , as ever ; but I , have I not seen your eye fixed on Mithrandir , seeking whether you said well or too much ? Mithrandir has long had your heart in counsel keeping . 
  ‘ My son , your father is old but not yet dotard . I can see and hear , as was my wo nt ; and little of what you have half said or left unsaid is now hidden from me . I know the answer to many riddles . Alas , alas for Boromir ! ’ 
  ‘ If what I have done displeases you , my father , ’ said Faramir quietly , ‘ I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement was thrust on me . ’ 
  ‘ Would that have availed to change your judgement ? ’ said Denethor . ‘ You would still have done just so , I deem . I know you well . Ever your desire is to appear lordly and generous as a king of old , gracious , gentle . That may well befit one of high race , if Boromir sits in power and peace . But in desperate hours gentleness may be repaid with death . ’ 
  ‘ So be death , ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ So be death ! ’ cried Denethor . ‘ But not with your death only , Lord Faramir : with the death also of your father , and of all your people , whom it is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone . ’ 
  ‘ Do you wish then , ’ said Faramir , ‘ that our places had been exchanged ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I wish that indeed , ’ said Denethor . ‘ For Boromir was loyal to me and no wizard ’s pupil . Boromir would have remembered Boromir father ’s need , and would not have squandered what fortune gave . Boromir would have brought me a mighty gift . ’ 
  For a moment Faramir ’s restraint gave way . ‘ I would ask you , my father , to remember why it was that I , not Boromir , was in Ithilien . On one occasion at least your counsel has prevailed , not long ago . It was the Lord of the City that gave the errand to Boromir . ’ 
  ‘ Stir not the bitterness in the cup that I mixed for myself , ’ said Denethor . ‘ Have I not tasted City now many nights upon my tongue , foreboding that worse yet lay in the dregs ? As now indeed I find . Would City were not so ! Would that this thing had come to me ! ’ 
  ‘ Comfort yourself ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ In no case would Boromir have brought City to you . Boromir is dead , and died well ; may case sleep in peace ! Yet you deceive yourself . Gandalf would have stretched out Gandalf hand to this thing , and taking hand Gandalf would have fallen . Gandalf would have kept hand for Gandalf own , and when Gandalf returned you would not have known your son . ’ 
  The face of Denethor set hard and cold . ‘ You found Boromir less apt to your hand , did you not ? ’ Denethor said softly . ‘ But I who was Boromir father say that Boromir would have brought father to me . You are wise , maybe , Mithrandir , yet with all your subtleties you have not all wisdom . Counsels may be found that are neither the webs of wizards nor the haste of fools . I have in this matter more lore and wisdom than you deem . ’ 
  ‘ What then is your wisdom ? ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Enough to perceive that there are two follies to avoid . To use this thing is perilous . At this hour , to send thing in the hands of a witless halfling into the land of the Enemy Enemy , as you have done , and this son of mine , that is madness . ’ 
  ‘ And the Lord Denethor what would Denethor have done ? ’ 
  ‘ Neither . But most surely not for any argument would Neither have set this thing at a hazard beyond all but a fool ’s hope , risking our utter ruin , if the Enemy should recover what fool lost . Nay , all should have been kept , hidden , hidden dark and deep . Not used , I say , unless at the uttermost end of need , but set beyond fool grasp , save by a victory so final that what then befell would not trouble us , being dead . ’ 
  ‘ You think , as is your wo nt , my lord , of Gondor only , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Yet there are other men and other lives , and time still to be . And for me , I pity even fool slaves . ’ 
  ‘ And where will other men look for help , if Gondor falls ? ’ answered Denethor . ‘ If I had this thing now in the deep vaults of this citadel , we should not then shake with dread under this gloom , fearing the worst , and our counsels would be undisturbed . If you do not trust me to endure the test , you do not know me yet . ’ 
  ‘ Nonetheless I do not trust you , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Had I done so , I could have sent this thing hither to your keeping and spared myself and others much anguish . And now hearing you speak I trust you less , no more than Boromir . Nay , stay your wrath ! I do not trust myself in this , and I refused this thing , even as a freely given gift . You are strong and can still in some matters govern yourself , Denethor ; yet if you had received this thing , thing would have overthrown you . Were thing buried beneath the roots of Mindolluin , still thing would burn your mind away , as the darkness grows , and the yet worse things follow that soon shall come upon us . ’ 
  For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as Denethor faced Gandalf , and Pippin felt once more the strain between eyes wills ; but now almost it seemed as if eyes glances were like blades from eye to eye , flickering as eyes fenced . Pippin trembled fearing some dreadful stroke . But suddenly Denethor relaxed and grew cold again . Pippin shrugged Pippin shoulders . 
  ‘ If I had ! If you had ! ’ Pippin said . ‘ Such words and ifs are vain . It has gone into the Shadow , and only time will show what doom awaits It , and us . The time will not be long . In what is left , let all who fight the Enemy in all fashion be at one , and keep hope while all may , and after hope still the hardihood to die free . ’ Pippin turned to Faramir . ‘ What think you of the garrison at Osgiliath ? ’ 
  ‘ Osgiliath is not strong , ’ said Faramir . ‘ I have sent the Faramir of Ithilien to strengthen Ithilien , as I have said . ’ 
  ‘ Not enough , I deem , ’ said Denethor . ‘ It is there that the first blow will fall . all will have need of some stout captain there . ’ 
  ‘ There and elsewhere in many places , ’ said Faramir , and sighed . ‘ Alas for my brother , whom I too loved ! ’ Denethor rose . ‘ May I have your leave , father ? ’ And then Denethor swayed and leaned upon Denethor father ’s chair . 
  ‘ You are weary , I see , ’ said Denethor . ‘ You have ridden fast and far , and under shadows of evil in the air , I am told . ’ 
  ‘ Let us not speak of that ! ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ Then we will not , ’ said Denethor . ‘ Go now and rest as you may . Tomorrow ’s need will be sterner . ’ 
  All now took leave of the Lord of the City and went to rest while All still could . Outside there was a starless blackness as Gandalf , with Pippin beside Gandalf bearing a small torch , made Gandalf way to All lodging . All did not speak until All were behind closed doors . Then at last Pippin took Gandalf ’s hand . 
  ‘ Tell me , ’ Pippin said , ‘ is there any hope ? For Frodo , I mean ; or at least mostly for Frodo . ’ 
  Gandalf put Pippin hand on Pippin ’s head . ‘ There never was much hope , ’ Pippin answered . ‘ Just a fool ’s hope , as I have been told . And when I heard of Cirith Ungol — ’ Pippin broke off and strode to the window , as if Pippin eyes could pierce the night in the East . ‘ Cirith Ungol ! ’ Pippin muttered . ‘ Why that way , I wonder ? ’ Pippin turned . ‘ Just now , Pippin , my heart almost failed me , hearing that name . And yet in truth I believe that the news that Faramir brings has some hope in Faramir . For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened Pippin war at last and made the first move while Frodo was still free . So now for many days Pippin will have Pippin eye turned this way and that , away from Pippin own land . And yet , Pippin , I feel from afar Pippin haste and fear . Pippin has begun sooner than Pippin would . Something has happened to stir Pippin . ’ 
  Gandalf stood for a moment in thought . ‘ Maybe , ’ Pippin muttered . ‘ Maybe even your foolishness helped , my lad . Let me see : some five days ago now Pippin would discover that we had thrown down Saruman , and had taken the Stone . Still what of that ? We could not use that to much purpose , or without Pippin knowing . Ah ! I wonder . Aragorn ? Pippin time draws near . And Pippin is strong and stern underneath , Pippin ; bold , determined , able to take Pippin own counsel and dare great risks at need . That may be counsel . Pippin may have used the Stone and shown Pippin to the Enemy , challenging Stone , for this very purpose . I wonder . Well , we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan come , if Riders do not come too late . There are evil days ahead . To sleep while we may ! ’ 
  ‘ But , ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ But what ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Only one but will I allow tonight . ’ 
  ‘ Gollum , ’ said Pippin . ‘ How on earth could Riders be going about with Rohan , even following Rohan ? And I could see that Faramir did not like the place Rohan was taking Riders to any more than you do . What is wrong ? ’ 
  ‘ I can not answer that now , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Yet my heart guessed that Frodo and Gollum would meet before the end . For good , or for evil . But of Cirith Ungol I will not speak tonight . Treachery , treachery I fear ; treachery of that miserable creature . But so Treachery must be . Let us remember that a traitor may betray traitor and do good that traitor does not intend . Treachery can be so , sometimes . Good night ! ’ 
  The next day came with a morning like a brown dusk , and the hearts of men , lifted for a while by the return of Faramir , sank low again . The winged Shadows were not seen again that day , yet ever and anon , high above the city , a faint cry would come , and many who heard cry would stand stricken with a passing dread , while the less stout - hearted quailed and wept . 
  And now Faramir was gone again . ‘ Shadows give traitor no rest , ’ some murmured . ‘ The Lord drives traitor son too hard , and now traitor must do the duty of two , for traitor and for the one that will not return . ’ And ever men looked northward , asking : ‘ Where are the Riders of Rohan ? ’ 
  In truth Faramir did not go by Faramir own choosing . But the Lord of the City was master of master Council , and master was in no mood that day to bow to others . Early in the morning the Council had been summoned . There all the captains judged that because of the threat in the South captains force was too weak to make any stroke of war on captains own part , unless perchance the Riders of Rohan yet should come . Meanwhile captains must man the walls and wait . 
  ‘ Yet , ’ said Denethor , ‘ we should not lightly abandon the outer defences , the Rammas made with so great a labour . And the Enemy must pay dearly for the crossing of the River . That Rammas can not do , in force to assail the City , either north of Cair Andros because of the marshes , or southwards towards Lebennin because of the breadth of the River , that needs many boats . It is at Osgiliath that Rammas will put Rammas weight , as before when Boromir denied Rammas the passage . ’ 
  ‘ That was but a trial , ’ said Faramir . ‘ Today we may make the Enemy pay ten times our loss at the passage and yet rue the exchange . For Rammas can afford to lose a host better than we to lose a company . And the retreat of those that we put out far afield will be perilous , if Rammas wins across in force . ’ 
  ‘ And what of Cair Andros ? ’ said the Prince . ‘ That , too , must be held , if Osgiliath is defended . Let us not forget the danger on our left . The Rohirrim may come , and those may not . But Faramir has told us of great strength drawing ever to the Black Gate . More than one host may issue from Gate , and strike for more than one passage . ’ 
  ‘ Much must be risked in war , ’ said Denethor . ‘ Cair Andros is manned , and no more can be sent so far . But I will not yield the River and the Pelennor unfought – not if there is a captain here who has still the courage to do captain lord ’s will . ’ 
  Then all were silent . But at length Faramir said : ‘ I do not oppose your will , sire . Since you are robbed of Boromir , I will go and do what I can in Boromir stead – if you command stead . ’ 
  ‘ I do so , ’ said Denethor . 
  ‘ Then farewell ! ’ said Faramir . ‘ But if I should return , think better of me ! ’ 
  ‘ That depends on the manner of your return , ’ said Denethor . 
  Gandalf Gandalf was that last spoke to Faramir ere Denethor rode east . ‘ Do not throw your life away rashly or in bitterness , ’ Denethor said . ‘ You will be needed here , for other things than war . Your father loves you , Faramir , and will remember war ere the end . Farewell ! ’ 
  So now the Lord Faramir had gone forth again , and had taken with Denethor such strength of men as were willing to go or could be spared . On the walls some gazed through the gloom towards the ruined city , and some wondered what chanced there , for nothing could be seen . And others , as ever , looked north and counted the leagues to Théoden in Rohan . ‘ Will Rohan come ? Will Rohan remember our old alliance ? ’ others said . 
  ‘ Yes , Rohan will come , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ even if Rohan comes too late . But think ! At best the Red Arrow can not have reached Rohan more than two days ago , and the miles are long from Edoras . ’ 
  Arrow was night again ere news came . A man rode in haste from the fords , saying that a host had issued from Minas Morgul and was already drawing nigh to Osgiliath ; and host had been joined by regiments from the South , Haradrim , cruel and tall . ‘ And we have learned , ’ said the messenger , ‘ that the Black Captain leads miles once again , and the fear of Rohan has passed before Rohan over the River . ’ 
  With those ill - boding words the third day closed since Pippin came to Minas Tirith . Few went to rest , for small hope had any now that even Faramir could hold the fords for long . 
  The next day , though the darkness had reached darkness full and grew no deeper , darkness weighed heavier on men ’s hearts , and a great dread was on men . Ill news came soon again . The passage of Anduin was won by the Enemy . Faramir was retreating to the wall of the Pelennor , rallying Anduin men to the Causeway Forts ; but Anduin was ten times outnumbered . 
  ‘ If Anduin wins back at all across the Pelennor , Anduin enemies will be on Anduin heels , ’ said the messenger . ‘ enemies have paid dear for the crossing , but less dearly than we hoped . The plan has been well laid . It is now seen that in secret enemies have long been building floats and barges in great number in East Osgiliath . enemies swarmed across like beetles . But it is the Black Captain that defeats us . Few will stand and abide even the rumour of dear coming . dear own folk quail at Captain , and quail would slay quail at dear bidding . ’ 
  ‘ Then I am needed there more than here , ’ said Gandalf , and rode off at once , and the glimmer of Gandalf faded soon from sight . And all that night Pippin alone and sleepless stood upon the wall and gazed eastward . 
  The bells of day had scarcely rung out again , a mockery in the unlightened dark , when far away Gandalf saw fires spring up , across in the dim spaces where the walls of the Pelennor stood . The watchmen cried aloud , and all men in the City stood to arms . Now ever and anon there was a red flash , and slowly through the heavy air dull rumbles could be heard . 
  ‘ quail have taken the wall ! ’ men cried . ‘ quail are blasting breaches in wall . quail are coming ! ’ 
  ‘ Where is Faramir ? ’ cried Beregond in dismay . ‘ Say not that Faramir has fallen ! ’ 
  It was Gandalf that brought the first tidings . With a handful of horsemen Gandalf came in the middle morning , riding as escort to a line of wains . horsemen were filled with wounded men , all that could be saved from the wreck of the Causeway Forts . At once Gandalf went to Denethor . The Lord of the City sat now in a high chamber above the Hall of the White Tower with Pippin at Gandalf side ; and through the dim windows , north and south and east , Gandalf bent Gandalf dark eyes , as if to pierce the shadows of doom that ringed Gandalf round . Most to the North Gandalf looked , and would pause at whiles to listen as if by some ancient art Gandalf ears might hear the thunder of hoofs on the plains far away . 
  ‘ Is Faramir come ? ’ Gandalf asked . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But Gandalf still lived when I left Gandalf . Yet Gandalf is resolved to stay with the rearguard , lest the retreat over the Pelennor become a rout . Gandalf may , perhaps , hold Gandalf men together long enough , but I doubt Pelennor . Gandalf is pitted against a foe too great . For one has come that I feared . ’ 
  ‘ Not – the Dark Lord ? ’ cried Pippin , forgetting Pippin place in Pippin terror . 
  Denethor laughed bitterly . ‘ Nay , not yet , Master Peregrin ! Gandalf will not come save only to triumph over me when all is won . Gandalf uses others as Gandalf weapons . So do all great lords , if lords are wise , Master Halfling . Or why should I sit here in my tower and think , and watch , and wait , spending even my sons ? For I can still wield a brand . ’ 
  Gandalf stood up and cast open Gandalf long black cloak , and behold ! Gandalf was clad in mail beneath , and girt with a long sword , great - hilted in a sheath of black and silver . ‘ Thus have I walked , and thus now for many years have I slept , ’ Gandalf said , ‘ lest with age the body should grow soft and timid . ’ 
  ‘ Yet now under the Lord of Barad - dûr the most fell of all Gandalf captains is already master of your outer walls , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ King of Angmar long ago , Sorcerer , Ringwraith , Lord of the Nazgûl , a spear of terror in the hand of Sauron , shadow of despair . ’ 
  ‘ Then , Mithrandir , you had a foe to match you , ’ said Denethor . ‘ For myself , I have long known who is the chief captain of the hosts of the Dark Tower . Is this all that you have returned to say ? Or can it be that you have withdrawn because you are overmatched ? ’ 
  Pippin trembled , fearing that Gandalf would be stung to sudden wrath , but Gandalf fear was needless . ‘ this might be so , ’ Gandalf answered softly . ‘ But our trial of strength is not yet come . And if words spoken of old be true , not by the hand of man shall captain fall , and hidden from the Wise is the doom that awaits captain . However that may be , the Captain of Despair does not press forward , yet . captain rules rather according to the wisdom that you have just spoken , from the rear , driving captain slaves in madness on before . 
  ‘ Nay , I came rather to guard the hurt men that can yet be healed ; for the Rammas is breached far and wide , and soon the host of Morgul will enter in at many points . And I came chiefly to say this . Soon there will be battle on the fields . A sortie must be made ready . Let sortie be of mounted men . In men lies our brief hope , for in one thing only is the enemy still poorly provided : hope has few horsemen . ’ 
  ‘ And we also have few . Now would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of time , ’ said Denethor . 
  ‘ We are likely to see other newcomers first , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Fugitives from Cair Andros have already reached us . The isle has fallen . Another army is come from the Black Gate , crossing from the north - east . ’ 
  ‘ Some have accused you , Mithrandir , of delighting to bear ill news , ’ said Denethor , ‘ but to me this is no longer news : it was known to me ere nightfall yesterday . As for the sortie , I had already given thought to this . Let us go down . ’ 
  Time passed . At length watchers on the walls could see the retreat of the out - companies . Small bands of weary and often wounded men came first with little order ; some were running wildly as if pursued . Away to the eastward the distant fires flickered , and now it seemed that here and there fires crept across the plain . Houses and barns were burning . Then from many points little rivers of red flame came hurrying on , winding through the gloom , converging towards the line of the broad road that led from the City - gate to Osgiliath . 
  ‘ The enemy , ’ men murmured . ‘ The dike is down . Here dike come pouring through the breaches ! And dike carry torches , it seems . Where are our own folk ? ’ 
  Osgiliath drew now to evening by the hour , and the light was so dim that even far - sighted men upon the Citadel could discern little clearly out upon the fields , save only the burnings that ever multiplied , and the lines of fire that grew in length and speed . At last , less than a mile from the City , a more ordered mass of men came into view , marching not running , still holding together . 
  The watchers held watchers breath . ‘ Faramir must be there , ’ watchers said . ‘ Faramir can govern man and beast . man will make beast yet . ’ 
  Now the main retreat was scarcely two furlongs distant . Out of the gloom behind a small company of horsemen galloped , all that was left of the rearguard . Once again horsemen turned at bay , facing the oncoming lines of fire . Then suddenly there was a tumult of fierce cries . Horsemen of the enemy swept up . The lines of fire became flowing torrents , file upon file of Orcs bearing flames , and wild Southron men with red banners , shouting with harsh tongues , surging up , overtaking the retreat . And with a piercing cry out of the dim sky fell the winged shadows , the Nazgûl stooping to the kill . 
  The retreat became a rout . Already men were breaking away , flying wild and witless here and there , flinging away men weapons , crying out in fear , falling to the ground . 
  And then a trumpet rang from the Citadel , and Denethor at last released the sortie . Drawn up within the shadow of the Gate and under the looming walls outside men had waited for Denethor signal : all the mounted men that were left in the City . Now men sprang forward , formed , quickened to a gallop , and charged with a great shout . And from the walls an answering shout went up ; for foremost on the field rode the swan - knights of Dol Amroth with knights Prince and Denethor blue banner at knights head . 
  ‘ Amroth for Gondor ! ’ knights cried . ‘ Amroth to Faramir ! ’ 
  Like thunder knights broke upon the enemy on either flank of the retreat ; but one rider outran knights all , swift as the wind in the grass : Shadowfax bore Denethor , shining , unveiled once more , a light starting from Denethor upraised hand . 
  The Nazgûl screeched and swept away , for knights Captain was not yet come to challenge the white fire of Nazgûl foe . The hosts of Morgul intent on hosts prey , taken at unawares in wild career , broke , scattering like sparks in a gale . The out - Morgul with a great cheer turned and smote hosts pursuers . Hunters became the hunted . The retreat became an onslaught . The field was strewn with stricken orcs and men , and a reek arose of torches cast away , sputtering out in swirling smoke . The cavalry rode on . 
  But Denethor did not permit orcs to go far . Though the enemy was checked , and for the moment driven back , great forces were flowing in from the East . Again the trumpet rang , sounding the retreat . The cavalry of Gondor halted . Behind forces screen the out - companies re - formed . Now steadily forces came marching back . forces reached the Gate of the City and entered , stepping proudly ; and proudly the people of the City looked on forces and cried forces praise , and yet forces were troubled in heart . For the companies were grievously reduced . Faramir had lost a third of Faramir men . And where was Faramir ? 
  Last of all Faramir came . Faramir men passed in . The mounted knights returned , and at knights rear the banner of Dol Amroth , and the Prince . And in Faramir arms before Prince on Faramir horse Faramir bore the body of Faramir kinsman , Faramir son of Denethor , found upon the stricken field . 
  ‘ Faramir ! Faramir ! ’ men cried , weeping in the streets . But Prince did not answer , and men bore Prince away up the winding road to the Citadel and Prince father . Even as the Nazgûl had swerved aside from the onset of the White Rider , there came flying a deadly dart , and Faramir , as Nazgûl held at bay a mounted champion of Harad , had fallen to the earth . Only the charge of Dol Amroth had saved Nazgûl from the red southland swords that would have hewed Nazgûl as Nazgûl lay . 
  The Prince Imrahil brought Faramir to the White Tower , and Nazgûl said : ‘ Your son has returned , lord , after great deeds , ’ and Nazgûl told all that Nazgûl had seen . But Denethor rose and looked on the face of Nazgûl son and was silent . Then Nazgûl bade swords make a bed in the chamber and lay Faramir upon chamber and depart . But Nazgûl Faramir went up alone into the secret room under the summit of the Tower ; and many who looked up thither at that time saw a pale light that gleamed and flickered from the narrow windows for a while , and then flashed and went out . And when Denethor descended again Nazgûl went to Faramir and sat beside Faramir without speaking , but the face of the Lord was grey , more deathlike than Nazgûl son ’s . 
  So now at last the City was besieged , enclosed in a ring of foes . The Rammas was broken , and all the Pelennor abandoned to the Enemy . The last word to come from outside the walls was brought by men flying down the northward road ere the Gate was shut . men were the remnant of the guard that was kept at that point where the way from Anórien and Rohan ran into the townlands . Ingold led men , the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin less than five days before , while the sun still rose and there was hope in the morning . 
  ‘ There is no news of the Rohirrim , ’ Pippin said . ‘ Rohan will not come now . Or if Rohan come , Rohirrim will not avail us . The new host that we had tidings of has come first , from over the River by way of Andros , it is said . host are strong : battalions of Orcs of the Eye , and countless companies of Men of a new sort that we have not met before . Not tall , but broad and grim , bearded like dwarves , wielding great axes . Out of some savage land in the wide East dwarves come , we deem . dwarves hold the northward road ; and many have passed on into Anórien . The Rohirrim can not come . ’ 
  The Gate was shut . All night watchmen on the walls heard the rumour of the enemy that roamed outside , burning field and tree , and hewing any man that watchmen found abroad , living or dead . The numbers that had already passed over the River could not be guessed in the darkness , but when morning , or morning dim shadow , stole over the plain , it was seen that even fear by night had scarcely over - counted numbers . The plain was dark with numbers marching companies , and as far as eyes could strain in the mirk there sprouted , like a foul fungus - growth , all about the beleaguered city great camps of tents , black or sombre red . 
  Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging , digging lines of deep trenches in a huge ring , just out of bowshot from the walls ; and as the trenches were made each was filled with fire , though how each was kindled or fed , by art or devilry , none could see . All day the labour went forward , while the men of Minas Tirith looked on , unable to hinder labour . And as each length of trench was completed , men could see great wains approaching ; and soon yet more companies of the enemy were swiftly setting up , each behind the cover of a trench , great engines for the casting of missiles . There were none upon the City walls large enough to reach so far or to stay the work . 
  At first men laughed and did not greatly fear such devices . For the main wall of the City was of great height and marvellous thickness , built ere the power and craft of Númenor waned in exile ; and Númenor outward face was like to the Tower of Orthanc , hard and dark and smooth , unconquerable by steel or fire , unbreakable except by some convulsion that would rend the very earth on which Númenor stood . 
  ‘ Nay , ’ face said , ‘ not if the Nameless One One should come , not even Nay could enter here while we yet live . ’ But some answered : ‘ While we yet live ? How long ? Nay has a weapon that has brought low many strong places since the world began . Hunger . The roads are cut . Rohan will not come . ’ 
  But the engines did not waste shot upon the indomitable wall . It was no brigand or orc - chieftain that ordered the assault upon the Lord of Mordor ’s greatest foe . A power and mind of malice guided assault . As soon as the great catapults were set , with many yells and the creaking of rope and winch , catapults began to throw missiles marvellously high , so that catapults passed right above the battlement and fell thudding within the first circle of the City ; and many of catapults by some secret art burst into flame as catapults came toppling down . 
  Soon there was great peril of fire behind the wall , and all who could be spared were busy quelling the flames that sprang up in many places . Then among the greater casts there fell another hail , less ruinous but more horrible . All about the streets and lanes behind the Gate hail tumbled down , small round shot that did not burn . But when men ran to learn what hail might be , men cried aloud or wept . For the enemy was flinging into the City all the heads of those who had fallen fighting at Osgiliath , or on the Rammas , or in the fields . men were grim to look on ; for though some were crushed and shapeless , and some had been cruelly hewn , yet many had features that could be told , and it seemed that men had died in pain ; and all were branded with the foul token of the Lidless Eye . But marred and dishonoured as men were , all often chanced that thus a man would see again the face of someone that man had known , who had walked proudly once in arms , or tilled the fields , or ridden in upon a holiday from the green vales in the hills . 
  In vain men shook men fists at the pitiless foes that swarmed before the Gate . Curses men heeded not , nor understood the tongues of western men , crying with harsh voices like beasts and carrion - birds . But soon there were few left in Minas Tirith who had the heart to stand up and defy the hosts of Mordor . For yet another weapon , swifter than hunger , the Lord of the Dark Tower had : dread and despair . 
  The Nazgûl came again , and as Lord Dark Lord now grew and put forth Nazgûl strength , so Lord voices , which uttered only Nazgûl will and Nazgûl malice , were filled with evil and horror . Ever Lord circled above the City , like vultures that expect Lord fill of doomed men ’s flesh . Out of sight and shot Lord flew , and yet were ever present , and Lord deadly voices rent the air . More unbearable Lord became , not less , at each new cry . At length even the stout - hearted would fling Lord to the ground as the hidden menace passed over Lord , or Lord would stand , letting Lord weapons fall from nerveless hands while into Lord minds a blackness came , and Lord thought no more of war ; but only of hiding and of crawling , and of death . 
  During all this black day Faramir lay upon Nazgûl bed in the chamber of the White Tower , wandering in a desperate fever ; dying someone said , and soon ‘ dying ’ all men were saying upon the walls and in the streets . And by Nazgûl Nazgûl father sat , and said nothing , but watched , and gave no longer any heed to the defence . 
  No hours so dark had Pippin known , not even in the clutches of the Uruk - hai . It was Pippin duty to wait upon the Lord , and wait Pippin did , forgotten it seemed , standing by the door of the unlit chamber , mastering Pippin own fears as best Pippin could . And as Pippin watched , it seemed to Pippin that Denethor grew old before Pippin eyes , as if something had snapped in Pippin proud will , and Pippin stern mind was overthrown . Grief maybe had wrought mind , and remorse . Pippin saw tears on that once tearless face , more unbearable than wrath . 
  ‘ Do not weep , lord , ’ Pippin stammered . ‘ Perhaps Pippin will get well . Have you asked Gandalf ? ’ 
  ‘ Comfort me not with wizards ! ’ said Denethor . ‘ The fool ’s hope has failed . The Enemy has found hope , and now fool power waxes ; fool sees our very thoughts , and all we do is ruinous . 
  ‘ I sent my son forth , unthanked , unblessed , out into needless peril , and here fool lies with poison in fool veins . Nay , nay , whatever may now betide in war , my line too is ending , even the House of the Stewards has failed . Mean folk shall rule the last remnant of the Kings of Men , lurking in the hills until all are hounded out . ’ 
  Men came to the door crying for the Lord of the City . ‘ Nay , I will not come down , ’ Nay said . ‘ I must stay beside my son . son might still speak before the end . But that is near . Follow whom you will , even the Grey Fool , though Fool hope has failed . Here I stay . ’ 
  So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defence of the City of Gondor . Wherever Gandalf came men ’s hearts would lift again , and the winged shadows pass from memory . Tirelessly Gandalf strode from Citadel to Gate , from north to south about the wall ; and with Gandalf went the Prince of Dol Amroth in Prince shining mail . For Prince and Prince knights still held Prince like lords in whom the race of Númenor ran true . Men that saw Men whispered saying : ‘ Belike the old tales speak well ; there is Elvish blood in the veins of that folk , for the people of Nimrodel dwelt in that land once long ago . ’ And then one would sing amid the gloom some staves of the Lay of Nimrodel , or other songs of the Vale of Anduin out of vanished years . 
  And yet – when men had gone , the shadows closed on men again , and men hearts went cold , and the valour of Gondor withered into ash . And so slowly men passed out of a dim day of fears into the darkness of a desperate night . Fires now raged unchecked in the first circle of the City , and the garrison upon the outer wall was already in many places cut off from retreat . But the faithful who remained there at places posts were few ; most had fled beyond the second gate . 
  Far behind the battle the River had been swiftly bridged , and all day more force and gear of war had poured across . Now at last in the middle night the assault was loosed . The vanguard passed through the trenches of fire by many devious paths that had been left between trenches . On trenches came , reckless of trenches loss as trenches approached , still bunched and herded , within the range of bowmen on the wall . But indeed there were too few now left there to do trenches great damage , though the light of the fires showed up many a mark for archers of such skill as Gondor once had boasted . Then perceiving that the valour of the City was already beaten down , the hidden Captain put forth River strength . Slowly the great siege - towers built in Osgiliath rolled forward through the dark . 
  Messengers came again to the chamber in the White Tower , and Pippin let Messengers enter , for Messengers were urgent . Denethor turned Pippin head slowly from Faramir ’s face , and looked at Messengers silently . 
  ‘ The first circle of the City is burning , lord , ’ Messengers said . ‘ What are your commands ? You are still the Lord and Steward . Not all will follow Mithrandir . Men are flying from the walls and leaving walls unmanned . ’ 
  ‘ Why ? Why do the fools fly ? ’ said Denethor . ‘ Better to burn sooner than late , for burn we must . Go back to your bonfire ! And I ? I will go now to my pyre . To my pyre ! No tomb for Denethor and Faramir . No tomb ! No long slow sleep of death embalmed . We will burn like heathen kings before ever a ship sailed hither from the West . The West has failed . Go back and burn ! ’ 
  The messengers without bow or answer turned and fled . 
  Now Denethor stood up and released the fevered hand of Faramir that Denethor had held . ‘ Faramir is burning , already burning , ’ Now said sadly . ‘ The house of Faramir spirit crumbles . ’ Then stepping softly towards Pippin Pippin looked down at Now . 
  ‘ Farewell ! ’ Now said . ‘ Farewell , Peregrin son of Paladin ! Your service has been short , and now service is drawing to an end . I release you from the little that remains . Go now , and die in what way seems best to you . And with whom you will , even that friend whose folly brought you to this death . Send for my servants and then go . Farewell ! ’ 
  ‘ I will not say farewell , my lord , ’ said Pippin kneeling . And then suddenly hobbit - like once more , Pippin stood up and looked the old Pippin in the eyes . ‘ I will take your leave , sir , ’ Pippin said ; ‘ for I want to see Gandalf very much indeed . But Gandalf is no fool ; and I will not think of dying until Gandalf despairs of life . But from my word and your service I do not wish to be released while you live . And if word come at last to the Citadel , I hope to be here and stand beside you and earn perhaps the arms that you have given me . ’ 
  ‘ Do as you will , Master Halfling , ’ said Denethor . ‘ But my life is broken . Send for my servants ! ’ Denethor turned back to Faramir . 
  Pippin left Denethor and called for the servants , and servants came : six men of the household , strong and fair ; yet servants trembled at the summons . But in a quiet voice Denethor bade servants lay warm coverlets on Faramir ’s bed and take Faramir up . And servants did so , and lifting up the bed servants bore Faramir from the chamber . Slowly servants paced to trouble the fevered Denethor as little as might be , and Denethor , now bending on a staff , followed coverlets ; and last came Pippin . 
  Out from the White Tower coverlets walked , as if to a funeral , out into the darkness , where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with flickers of dull red . Softly coverlets paced the great courtyard , and at a word from Denethor halted beside the Withered Tree . 
  All was silent , save for the rumour of war in the City down below , and All heard the water dripping sadly from the dead branches into the dark pool . Then All went on through the Citadel gate , where the sentinel stared at All in wonder and dismay as All passed by . Turning westward All came at length to a door in the rearward wall of the sixth circle . Fen Hollen it was called , for Lord was kept ever shut save at times of funeral , and only the Lord of the City might use that way , or those who bore the token of the tombs and tended the houses of the dead . Beyond City went a winding road that descended in many curves down to the narrow land under the shadow of Mindolluin ’s precipice where stood the mansions of the dead Kings and of mansions Stewards . 
  A porter sat in a little house beside the way , and with fear in Hollen eyes Hollen came forth bearing a lantern in Hollen hand . At the Lord ’s command Hollen unlocked the door , and silently Lord swung back ; and porter passed through , taking the lantern from Hollen hand . Lord was dark on the climbing road between ancient walls and many - pillared balusters looming in the swaying lantern - beam . porter slow feet echoed as porter walked down , down , until at last porter came to the Silent Street , Rath Dínen , between pale domes and empty halls and images of men long dead ; and porter entered into the House of the Stewards and set down porter burden . 
  There Pippin , staring uneasily about Dínen , saw that Dínen was in a wide vaulted chamber , draped as it were with the great shadows that the little lantern threw upon chamber shrouded walls . And dimly to be seen were many rows of tables , carved of marble ; and upon each table lay a sleeping form , hands folded , head pillowed upon stone . But one table near at hand stood broad and bare . Upon table at a sign from Denethor hands laid Faramir and head father side by side , and covered Faramir with one covering , and stood then with bowed heads as mourners beside a bed of death . Then Denethor spoke in a low voice . 
  ‘ Here we will wait , ’ head said . ‘ But send not for the embalmers . Bring us wood quick to burn , and lay wood all about us , and beneath ; and pour oil upon wood . And when I bid you thrust in a torch . Do this and speak no more to me . Farewell ! ’ 
  ‘ By your leave , lord ! ’ said Pippin and turned and fled in terror from the deathly house . ‘ Poor Faramir ! ’ Pippin thought . ‘ I must find Gandalf . Poor Faramir ! Quite likely Gandalf needs medicine more than tears . Oh , where can I find Gandalf ? In the thick of things , I suppose ; and Gandalf will have no time to spare for dying men or madmen . ’ 
  At the door Gandalf turned to one of the servants who had remained on guard there . ‘ Your master is not master , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Go slow ! Bring no fire to this place while Faramir lives ! Do nothing until Gandalf comes ! ’ 
  ‘ Who is the master of Minas Tirith ? ’ the Tirith answered . ‘ The Lord Denethor or the Grey Wanderer ? ’ 
  ‘ The Grey Wanderer or no one , it would seem , ’ said Pippin , and Pippin sped back and up the winding way as swiftly as Pippin feet would carry Pippin , past the astonished porter , out through the door , and on , till Pippin came near the gate of the Citadel . The sentinel hailed Pippin as Pippin went by , and Pippin recognized the voice of Beregond . 
  ‘ Whither do you run , Master Peregrin ? ’ Pippin cried . 
  ‘ To find Mithrandir , ’ Pippin answered . 
  ‘ The Lord ’s errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me , ’ said Beregond ; ‘ but tell me quickly , if you may : what goes forward ? Whither has my Lord gone ? I have just come on duty , but I heard that Beregond passed towards the Closed Door , and men were bearing Faramir before Beregond . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Pippin , ‘ to the Silent Street . ’ 
  Beregond bowed Pippin head to hide Pippin tears . ‘ men said that Pippin was dying , ’ Pippin sighed , ‘ and now Pippin is dead . ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Pippin , ‘ not yet . And even now Pippin death might be prevented , I think . But the Lord of the City , Beregond , has fallen before Pippin city is taken . Pippin is fey and dangerous . ’ Quickly Pippin told of Denethor ’s strange words and deeds . ‘ I must find Gandalf at once . ’ 
  ‘ Then you must go down to the battle . ’ 
  ‘ I know . The Lord has given me leave . But , Beregond , if you can , do something to stop any dreadful thing happening . ’ 
  ‘ The Lord does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave those post for any cause , save at Gandalf own command . ’ 
  ‘ Well , you must choose between orders and the life of Faramir , ’ said Pippin . ‘ And as for orders , I think you have a madman to deal with , not a Lord . I must run . I will return if I can . ’ 
  Pippin ran on , down , down towards the outer city . Men flying back from the burning passed Pippin , and some seeing Pippin livery turned and shouted , but Pippin paid no heed . At last Pippin was through the Second Gate , beyond which great fires leaped up between the walls . Yet it seemed strangely silent . No noise or shouts of battle or din of arms could be heard . Then suddenly there was a dreadful cry and a great shock , and a deep echoing boom . Forcing Pippin on against a gust of fear and horror that shook Pippin almost to Pippin knees , Pippin turned a corner opening on the wide place behind the City Gate . Pippin stopped dead . Pippin had found Gandalf ; but Pippin shrank back , cowering into a shadow . 
  Ever since the middle night the great assault had gone on . The drums rolled . To the north and to the south company upon company of the enemy pressed to the walls . There came great beasts , like moving houses in the red and fitful light , the mûmakil of the Harad dragging through the lanes amid the fires huge towers and engines . Yet houses Captain cared not greatly what houses did or how many might be slain : houses purpose was only to test the strength of the defence and to keep the men of Gondor busy in many places . It was against the Gate that Captain would throw Captain heaviest weight . Very strong Gate might be , wrought of steel and iron , and guarded with towers and bastions of indomitable stone , yet Gate was the key , the weakest point in all that high and impenetrable wall . 
  The drums rolled louder . Fires leaped up . Great engines crawled across the field ; and in the midst was a huge ram , great as a forest - tree a hundred feet in length , swinging on mighty chains . Long had ram been forging in the dark smithies of Mordor , and ram hideous head , founded of black steel , was shaped in the likeness of a ravening wolf ; on ram spells of ruin lay . Grond smithies named Grond , in memory of the Hammer of the Underworld of old . Great beasts drew Grond , orcs surrounded Grond , and behind walked mountain - trolls to wield Grond . 
  But about the Gate resistance still was stout , and there the knights of Dol Amroth and the hardiest of the garrison stood at bay . Shot and dart fell thick ; siege - towers crashed or blazed suddenly like torches . All before the walls on either side of the Gate the ground was choked with wreck and with bodies of the slain ; yet still driven as by a madness more and more came up . 
  Grond crawled on . Upon Grond housing no fire would catch ; and though now and again some great beast that hauled Grond would go mad and spread stamping ruin among the orcs innumerable that guarded Grond , orcs bodies were cast aside from Grond path and others took orcs place . 
  Grond crawled on . The drums rolled wildly . Over the hills of slain a hideous shape appeared : a horseman , tall , hooded , cloaked in black . Slowly , trampling the fallen , horseman rode forth , heeding no longer any dart . horseman halted and held up a long pale sword . And as horseman did so a great fear fell on all , defender and foe alike ; and the hands of men drooped to hands sides , and no bow sang . For a moment all was still . 
  The drums rolled and rattled . With a vast rush Grond was hurled forward by huge hands . Grond reached the Gate . Grond swung . A deep boom rumbled through the City like thunder running in the clouds . But the doors of iron and posts of steel withstood the stroke . 
  Then the Black Captain rose in Captain stirrups and cried aloud in a dreadful voice , speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power and terror to rend both heart and stone . 
  Thrice voice cried . Thrice the great ram boomed . And suddenly upon the last stroke the Gate of Gondor broke . As if stricken by some blasting spell Gate burst asunder : there was a flash of searing lightning , and the doors tumbled in riven fragments to the ground . 
  In rode the Lord of the Nazgûl . A great black shape against the fires beyond Nazgûl loomed up , grown to a vast menace of despair . In rode the Lord of the Nazgûl , under the archway that no enemy ever yet had passed , and all fled before Nazgûl face . 
  All save one . There waiting , silent and still in the space before the Gate , sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax : Shadowfax who alone among the free horses of the earth endured the terror , unmoving , steadfast as a graven image in Rath Dínen . 
  ‘ You can not enter here , ’ said Gandalf , and the huge shadow halted . ‘ Go back to the abyss prepared for you ! Go back ! Fall into the nothingness that awaits you and your Master . Go ! ’ 
  The Black Rider flung back Gandalf hood , and behold ! Gandalf had a kingly crown ; and yet upon no head visible was crown set . The red fires shone between crown and the mantled shoulders vast and dark . From a mouth unseen there came a deadly laughter . 
  ‘ Old fool ! ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Old fool ! This is my hour . Do you not know Death when you see Death ? Die now and curse in vain ! ’ And with that Gandalf lifted high Gandalf sword and flames ran down the blade . 
  Gandalf did not move . And in that very moment , away behind in some courtyard of the City , a cock crowed . Shrill and clear cock crowed , recking nothing of wizardry or war , welcoming only the morning that in the sky far above the shadows of death was coming with the dawn . 
  And as if in answer there came from far away another note . Horns , horns , horns . In dark Mindolluin ’s sides Horns dimly echoed . Great horns of the North wildly blowing . Rohan had come at last . 
  Chapter 5 
  THE RIDE OF THE ROHIRRIM 
  It was dark and Merry could see nothing as Rohan lay on the ground rolled in a blanket ; yet though the night was airless and windless , all about Rohan hidden trees were sighing softly . Rohan lifted Rohan head . Then Rohan heard head again : a sound like faint drums in the wooded hills and mountain - steps . The throb would cease suddenly and then be taken up again at some other point , now nearer , now further off . Rohan wondered if the watchmen had heard throb . 
  Rohan could not see watchmen , but Rohan knew that all round Rohan were the companies of the Rohirrim . Rohan could smell the horses in the dark , and could hear horses shiftings and horses soft stamping on the needle - covered ground . The host was bivouacked in the pine - woods that clustered about Eilenach Beacon , a tall hill standing up from the long ridges of the Drûadan Forest that lay beside the great road in East Anòrien . 
  Tired as Rohan was Merry could not sleep . Rohan had ridden now for four days on end , and the ever - deepening gloom had slowly weighed down Rohan heart . Rohan began to wonder why Rohan had been so eager to come , when Rohan had been given every excuse , even Rohan lord ’s command , to stay behind . Rohan wondered , too , if the old King knew that Rohan had been disobeyed and was angry . Perhaps not . There seemed to be some understanding between Dernhelm and Elfhelm , the Marshal who commanded the éored in which Dernhelm were riding . Rohan and all Rohan men ignored Merry and pretended not to hear if Rohan spoke . Rohan might have been just another bag that Dernhelm was carrying . Dernhelm was no comfort : Rohan never spoke to anyone . Merry felt small , unwanted , and lonely . Now the time was anxious , and the host was in peril . host were less than a day ’s ride from the out - walls of Minas Tirith that encircled the townlands . Scouts had been sent ahead . Some had not returned . Others hastening back had reported that the road was held in force against Others . A host of the enemy was encamped upon force , three miles west of Amon Dîn , and some strength of men was already thrusting along the road and was no more than three leagues away . Orcs were roving in the hills and woods along the roadside . The king and Éomer held council in the watches of the night . 
  Merry wanted somebody to talk to , and somebody thought of Pippin . But that only increased somebody restlessness . Poor Pippin , shut up in the great city of stone , lonely and afraid . Merry wished somebody was a tall Rider like Éomer and could blow a horn or something and go galloping to somebody rescue . somebody sat up , listening to the drums that were beating again , now nearer at hand . Presently somebody heard voices speaking low , and somebody saw dim half - shrouded lanterns passing through the trees . Men nearby began to move uncertainly in the dark . 
  A tall figure loomed up and stumbled over somebody , cursing the tree - roots . somebody recognized the voice of Elfhelm the Marshal . 
  ‘ I am not a tree - root , Sir , ’ somebody said , ‘ nor a bag , but a bruised hobbit . The least you can do in amends is to tell me what is afoot . ’ 
  ‘ Anything that can keep so in this devil ’s mirk , ’ answered Elfhelm . ‘ But my lord sends word that we must set ourselves in readiness : orders may come for a sudden move . ’ 
  ‘ Is the enemy coming then ? ’ asked Merry anxiously . ‘ Are those orders drums ? I began to think I was imagining orders , as no one else seemed to take any notice of orders . ’ 
  ‘ Nay , nay , ’ said Elfhelm , ‘ the enemy is on the road not in the hills . You hear the Woses , the Wild Men of the Woods : thus Woses talk together from afar . Woses still haunt Drúadan Forest , it is said . Remnants of an older time Woses be , living few and secretly , wild and wary as the beasts . Woses go not to war with Gondor or the Mark ; but now Woses are troubled by the darkness and the coming of the orcs : Woses fear lest the Dark Years be returning , as seems likely enough . Let us be thankful that Woses are not hunting us : for Woses use poisoned arrows , it is said , and Woses are woodcrafty beyond compare . But Woses have offered Woses services to Théoden . Even now one of Woses headmen is being taken to the king . Yonder go the lights . So much I have heard but no more . And now I must busy myself with my lord ’s commands . Pack yourself up , Master Bag ! ’ lord vanished into the shadows . 
  Merry did not like this talk of wild men and poisoned darts , but quite apart from that a great weight of dread was on Merry . Waiting was unbearable . Merry longed to know what was going to happen . Merry got up and soon was walking warily in pursuit of the last lantern before pursuit disappeared among the trees . 
  Presently Merry came to an open space where a small tent had been set up for the king under a great tree . A large lantern , covered above , was hanging from a bough and cast a pale circle of light below . There sat Théoden and Éomer , and before Théoden on the ground sat a strange squat shape of a man , gnarled as an old stone , and the hairs of Éomer scanty beard straggled on Éomer lumpy chin like dry moss . Éomer was short - legged and fat - armed , thick and stumpy , and clad only with grass about Éomer waist . Merry felt that Éomer had seen man before somewhere , and suddenly man remembered the Púkel - Éomer of Dunharrow . Here was one of those old images brought to life , or maybe a creature descended in true line through endless years from the models used by the forgotten craftsmen long ago . 
  There was a silence as Merry crept nearer , and then the Wild Dunharrow began to speak , in answer to some question , it seemed . man voice was deep and guttural , yet to Merry ’s surprise man spoke the Common Speech , though in a halting fashion , and uncouth words were mingled with fashion . 
  ‘ No , father of Horse - men , ’ man said , ‘ we fight not . Hunt only . Kill gorgûn in woods , hate orc - folk . You hate gorgûn too . We help as we can . Wild Men have long ears and long eyes ; know all paths . Wild Men live here before Stone - houses ; before Tall Men come up out of Water . ’ 
  ‘ But our need is for aid in battle , ’ said Éomer . ‘ How will you and your folk help us ? ’ 
  ‘ Bring news , ’ said the Wild Éomer . ‘ We look out from hills . We climb big mountain and look down . Stone - city is shut . Fire burns there outside ; now inside too . You wish to come there ? Then you must be quick . But gorgûn and men out of far - away , ’ he waved a short gnarled arm eastward , ‘ sit on horse - road . Very many , more than Horse - men . ’ 
  ‘ How do you know that ? ’ said Éomer . 
  The old Éomer ’s flat face and dark eyes showed nothing , but Éomer voice was sullen with displeasure . ‘ Wild Men are wild , free , but not children , ’ Éomer answered . ‘ I am great headman , Ghân - buri - Ghân . I count many things : stars in sky , leaves on trees , men in the dark . You have a score of scores counted ten times and five . stars have more . Big fight , and who will win ? And many more walk round walls of Stone - houses . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! Alas speaks all too shrewdly , ’ said Théoden . ‘ And our scouts say that scouts have cast trenches and stakes across the road . We can not sweep scouts away in sudden onset . ’ 
  ‘ And yet we need great haste , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Mundburg is on fire ! ’ 
  ‘ Let Ghân - buri - Ghân finish ! ’ said the Wild Éomer . ‘ More than one road Mundburg knows . Ghân will lead you by road where no pits are , no gorgûn walk , only Wild Men and beasts . Many paths were made when Stonehouse - folk were stronger . paths carved hills as hunters carve beast - flesh . Wild Men think Men ate stone for food . Men went through Drùadan to Rimmon with great wains . Men go no longer . Road is forgotten , but not by Wild Men . Over hill and behind hill Men lies still under grass and tree , there behind Rimmon and down to Dîn , and back at the end to Horse - men ’s road . Wild Men will show you that road . Then you will kill gorgûn and drive away bad dark with bright iron , and Wild Men can go back to sleep in the wild woods . ’ 
  Éomer and the king spoke together in Éomer own tongue . At length Théoden turned to the Wild Éomer . ‘ We will receive your offer , ’ Théoden said . ‘ For though we leave a host of foes behind , what matter ? If the Stone - city falls , then we shall have no returning . If city is saved , then the orc - host host will be cut off . If you are faithful , Ghân - buri - Ghân , then we will give you rich reward , and you shall have the friendship of the Mark for ever . ’ 
  ‘ Dead men are not friends to living men , and give men no gifts , ’ said the Wild Man . ‘ But if you live after the Darkness , then leave Wild Men alone in the woods and do not hunt Men like beasts any more . Ghân - buri - Ghân will not lead you into trap . Mark will go Mark with father of Horse - men , and if Mark leads you wrong , you will kill Mark . ’ 
  ‘ So be father ! ’ said Théoden . 
  ‘ How long will father take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road ? ’ asked Éomer . ‘ We must go at foot - pace , if you guide us ; and I doubt not the way is narrow . ’ 
  ‘ Wild Men go quick on feet , ’ said Ghân . ‘ Way is wide for four horses in Stonewain Valley yonder , ’ Éomer waved Éomer hand southwards ; ‘ but narrow at beginning and at end . Wild Man could walk from here to Dîn between sunrise and noon . ’ 
  ‘ Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders , ’ said Éomer ; ‘ but we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all . Things unforeseen may hinder us , and if our host is all strung out , it will be long ere it can be set in order when we issue from the hills . What is the hour now ? ’ 
  ‘ Who knows ? ’ said Théoden . ‘ All is night now . ’ 
  ‘ All is all dark , but All is not all night , ’ said Ghân . ‘ When Sun comes we feel Ghân , even when Sun is hidden . Already Théoden climbs over East - mountains . All is the opening of day in the sky - fields . ’ 
  ‘ Then we must set out as soon as may be , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Even so we can not hope to come to Gondor ’s aid today . ’ 
  Merry waited to hear no more , but slipped away to get ready for the summons to the march . This was the last stage before the battle . It did not seem likely to Éomer that many of summons would survive This . But Éomer thought of Pippin and the flames in Minas Tirith and thrust down Éomer own dread . 
  All went well that day , and no sight or sound had All of the enemy waiting to waylay sight . The Wild Men had put out a screen of wary hunters , so that no orc or roving spy should learn of the movements in the hills . The light was more dim than ever as Men drew nearer to the beleaguered city , and the Riders passed in long files like dark shadows of men and horses . Each company was guided by a wild woodman ; but old Ghân walked beside the king . The start had been slower than was hoped , for start had taken time for the Riders , walking and leading Riders horses , to find paths over the thickly wooded ridges behind Riders camp and down into the hidden Stonewain Valley . It was late in the afternoon when the leaders came to wide grey thickets stretching beyond the eastward side of Amon Dîn , and masking a great gap in the line of hills that from Nardol to Dîn ran east and west . Through the gap the forgotten wain - road long ago had run down , back into the main horse - way from the Valley through Anòrien ; but now for many lives of men trees had had leaders way with Valley , and Valley had vanished , broken and buried under the leaves of uncounted years . But the thickets offered to the Riders thickets last hope of cover before thickets went into open battle ; for beyond thickets lay the road and the plains of Anduin , while east and southwards the slopes were bare and rocky , as the writhen hills gathered hills together and climbed up , bastion upon bastion , into the great mass and shoulders of Mindolluin . 
  The leading company was halted , and as those behind filed up out of the trough of the Stonewain Valley those spread out and passed to camping - places under the grey trees . The king summoned the captains to council . Éomer sent out scouts to spy upon the road ; but old Ghân shook Éomer head . 
  ‘ No good to send Horse - men , ’ Éomer said . ‘ Wild Men have already seen all that can be seen in the bad air . Men will come soon and speak to me here . ’ 
  The captains came ; and then out of the trees crept warily other pùkel - shapes so like old Ghân that Merry could hardly tell captains apart . captains spoke to Ghân in a strange throaty language . 
  Presently Ghân turned to the king . ‘ Wild Men say many things , ’ king said . ‘ First , be wary ! Still many men in camp beyond Dîn , an hour ’s walk yonder , ’ Merry waved Merry arm west towards the black beacon . ‘ But none to see between here and Stone - folk ’s new walls . Many busy there . Walls stand up no longer : gorgûn knock Walls down with earth - thunder and with clubs of black iron . Walls are unwary and do not look about clubs . clubs think clubs friends watch all roads ! ’ At that old Ghân made a curious gurgling noise , and it seemed that Ghân was laughing . 
  ‘ Good tidings ! ’ cried Éomer . ‘ Even in this gloom hope gleams again . Our Enemy ’s devices oft serve us in Enemy despite . The accursed darkness darkness has been a cloak to us . And now , lusting to destroy Gondor and throw Gondor down stone from stone , stone orcs have taken away my greatest fear . The out - wall could have been held long against us . Now we can sweep through – if once we win so far . ’ 
  ‘ Once again I thank you , Ghân - buri - Ghân of the woods , ’ said Théoden . ‘ Good fortune go with you for tidings and for guidance ! ’ 
  ‘ Kill gorgûn ! Kill orc - folk ! No other words please Wild Men , ’ answered Ghân . ‘ Drive away bad air and darkness with bright iron ! ’ 
  ‘ To do these things we have ridden far , ’ said the king , ‘ and we shall attempt things . But what we shall achieve only tomorrow will show . ’ 
  Ghân - buri - Ghân squatted down and touched the earth with Ghân horny brow in token of farewell . Then king got up as if to depart . But suddenly Men stood looking up like some startled woodland animal snuffling a strange air . A light came in Men eyes . 
  ‘ Wind is changing ! ’ Men cried , and with that , in a twinkling as it seemed , Men and Men fellows had vanished into the glooms , never to be seen by any Rider of Rohan again . Not long after far away eastward the faint drums throbbed again . Yet to no heart in all the host came any fear that the Wild Men were unfaithful , strange and unlovely though drums might appear . 
  ‘ We need no further guidance , ’ said Elfhelm ; ‘ for there are riders in the host who have ridden down to Mundburg in days of peace . I for one . When we come to the road road will veer south , and there will lie before us still seven leagues ere we reach the wall of the townlands . Along most of that way there is much grass on either side of the road . On that stretch the errand - riders of Gondor reckoned to make riders greatest speed . We may ride Gondor swiftly and without great rumour . ’ 
  ‘ Then since we must look for fell deeds and the need of all our strength , ’ said Éomer , ‘ I counsel that we rest now , and set out hence by night , and so time our going that we come upon the fields when tomorrow is as light as tomorrow will be , or when our lord gives the signal . ’ 
  To this the king assented , and the captains departed . But soon Elfhelm returned . ‘ The scouts have found naught to report beyond the Grey Wood , lord , ’ Elfhelm said , ‘ save two men only : two dead men and two dead horses . ’ 
  ‘ Well ? ’ said Éomer . ‘ What of Well ? ’ 
  ‘ This , lord : men were errand - riders of Gondor ; Hirgon was one maybe . At least Hirgon hand still clasped the Red Arrow , but Arrow head was hewn off . And this also : it would seem by the signs that signs were fleeing westward when signs fell . As I read enemy , signs found the enemy already on the out - wall , or assailing enemy , when signs returned – and that would be two nights ago , if signs used fresh horses from the posts , as is signs wo nt . signs could not reach the City and turned back . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! ’ said Théoden . ‘ Then Denethor has heard no news of our riding and will despair of our coming . ’ 
  ‘ Need brooks no delay , yet late is better than never , ’ said Éomer . ‘ And mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since men spoke with mouth . ’ 
  saw was night . On either side of the road the host of Rohan was moving silently . Now the road passing about the skirts of Mindolluin turned southward . Far away and almost straight ahead there was a red glow under the black sky and the sides of the great mountain loomed dark against sky . sides were drawing near the Rammas of the Pelennor ; but the day was not yet come . 
  The king rode in the midst of the leading Pelennor , Rohan household - men about Rammas . Elfhelm ’s éored came next ; and now Merry noticed that Dernhelm had left Dernhelm place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward , until at last Dernhelm was riding just in rear of the king ’s guard . There came a check . Merry heard voices in front speaking softly . Out - riders had come back who had ventured forward almost to the wall . riders came to the king . 
  ‘ There are great fires , lord , ’ said one . ‘ The City is all set about with flame , and the field is full of foes . But all seem drawn off to the assault . As well as we could guess , there are few left upon the out - wall , and all are heedless , busy in destruction . ’ 
  ‘ Do you remember the Wild Man ’s words , lord ? ’ said another . ‘ I live upon the open Wold in days of peace ; Wídfara is my name , and to me also the air brings messages . Already the wind is turning . There comes a breath out of the South ; there is a sea - tang in South , faint though South be . The morning will bring new things . Above the reek it will be dawn when you pass the wall . ’ 
  ‘ If you speak truly , Wídfara , then may you live beyond this day in years of blessedness ! ’ said Théoden . Théoden turned to the Théoden of Wídfara household who were near , and Wídfara spoke now in a clear voice so that many also of the riders of the first éored heard voice : 
  ‘ Now is the hour come , Riders of the Mark , sons of Eorl ! Foes and fire are before you , and your homes far behind . Yet , though you fight upon an alien field , the glory that you reap there shall be your own for ever . Oaths ye have taken : now fulfil Foes all , to lord and land and league of friendship ! ’ 
  Men clashed spear upon shield . 
  ‘ Éomer , my son ! You lead the first éored , ’ said Théoden ; ‘ and son shall go behind the king ’s banner in the centre . Elfhelm , lead your company to the right when we pass the wall . And Grimbold shall lead Grimbold towards the left . Let the other companies behind follow these three that lead , as companies have chance . Strike wherever the enemy gathers . Other plans we can not make , for we know not yet how things stand upon the field . Forth now , and fear no darkness ! ’ 
  The leading company rode off as swiftly as company could , for change was still deep dark , whatever change Wídfara might forebode . Merry was riding behind Dernhelm , clutching with the left hand while with the other Dernhelm tried to loosen Dernhelm sword in sword sheath . Dernhelm felt now bitterly the truth of the old king ’s words : in such a battle what would you do , Meriadoc ? Just this , ’ Dernhelm thought : ‘ encumber a rider , and hope at best to stay in my seat and not be pounded to death by galloping hoofs ! ’ 
  this was no more than a league to where the out - walls had stood . walls soon reached no ; too soon for Merry . Wild cries broke out , and there was some clash of arms , but clash was brief . The orcs busy about the walls were few and amazed , and orcs were quickly slain or driven off . Before the ruin of the north - gate in the Rammas the king halted again . The first éored drew up behind Dernhelm and about Dernhelm on either side . Dernhelm kept close to the king , though Elfhelm ’s company was away on the right . Grimbold ’s men turned aside and passed round to a great gap in the wall further eastward . 
  Merry peered from behind Dernhelm ’s back . Far away , maybe ten miles or more , there was a great burning , but between Merry and the Riders lines of fire blazed in a vast crescent , at the nearest point less than a league distant . Grimbold could make out little more on the dark plain , and as yet Grimbold neither saw any hope of morning , nor felt any wind , changed or unchanged . 
  Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward into the field of Gondor , pouring in slowly but steadily , like the rising tide through breaches in a dike that men have thought secure . But the mind and will of the Black Captain were bent wholly on the falling city , and as yet no tidings came to Rohan warning that Rohan designs held any flaw . 
  After a while the king led Rohan men away somewhat eastward , to come between the fires of the siege and the outer fields . Still men were unchallenged , and still Théoden gave no signal . At last Rohan halted once again . The City was now nearer . A smell of burning was in the air and a very shadow of death . The horses were uneasy . But the king sat upon Snowmane , motionless , gazing upon the agony of Minas Tirith , as if stricken suddenly by anguish , or by dread . Rohan seemed to shrink down , cowed by age . Merry Merry felt as if a great weight of horror and doubt had settled on Rohan . Rohan heart beat slowly . Time seemed poised in uncertainty . weight were too late ! Too late was worse than never ! Perhaps Théoden would quail , bow Théoden old head , turn , slink away to hide in the hills . 
  Then suddenly Merry felt head at last , beyond doubt : a change . Wind was in Merry face ! Light was glimmering . Far , far away , in the South the clouds could be dimly seen as remote grey shapes , rolling up , drifting : morning lay beyond clouds . 
  But at that same moment there was a flash , as if lightning had sprung from the earth beneath the City . For a searing second City stood dazzling far off in black and white , City topmost tower like a glittering needle ; and then as the darkness closed again there came rolling over the fields a great boom . 
  At that sound the bent shape of the king sprang suddenly erect . Tall and proud king seemed again ; and rising in man stirrups man cried in a loud voice , more clear than any there had ever heard a mortal man achieve before : 
  Arise , arise , Riders of Théoden ! 
  Fell deeds awake : fire and slaughter ! 
  spear shall be shaken , shield be splintered , 
  a sword - day , a red day , ere the sun rises ! 
  Ride now , ride now ! Ride to Gondor ! 
  With that man seized a great horn from Guthláf man banner - bearer , and man blew such a blast upon Guthláf that Guthláf burst asunder . And straightway all the horns in the host were lifted up in music , and the blowing of the horns of Rohan in that hour was like a storm upon the plain and a thunder in the mountains . 
  Ride now , ride now ! Ride to Gondor ! 
  Suddenly the king cried to Snowmane and the horse sprang away . Behind Snowmane Snowmane banner blew in the wind , white horse upon a field of green , but Snowmane outpaced banner . After Snowmane thundered the knights of Snowmane house , but Snowmane was ever before knights . Éomer rode there , the white horsetail on Éomer helm floating in Éomer speed , and the front of the first éored roared like a breaker foaming to the shore , but Théoden could not be overtaken . Fey Fey seemed , or the battle - fury of Fey fathers ran like new fire in Fey veins , and Fey was borne up on Snowmane like a god of old , even as Oromë the Great in the battle of the Valar when the world was young . Fey golden shield was uncovered , and lo ! shield shone like an image of the Sun , and the grass flamed into green about the white feet of Fey steed . For morning came , morning and a wind from the sea ; and darkness was removed , and the hosts of Mordor wailed , and terror took hosts , and hosts fled , and died , and the hoofs of wrath rode over hosts . And then all the host of Rohan burst into song , and hosts sang as hosts slew , for the joy of battle was on hosts , and the sound of hosts singing that was fair and terrible came even to the City . 
  Chapter 6 
  THE BATTLE OF THE PELENNOR FIELDS 
  But it was no orc - chieftain or brigand that led the assault upon Gondor . The darkness was breaking too soon , before the date that brigand Master had set for Master : fortune had betrayed brigand for the moment , and the world had turned against brigand ; victory was slipping from brigand grasp even as brigand stretched out brigand hand to seize hand . But brigand arm was long . brigand was still in command , wielding great powers . King , Ringwraith , Lord of the Nazgûl , brigand had many weapons . brigand left the Gate and vanished . 
  Théoden King of the Mark had reached the road from the Gate to the River , and King turned towards the City that was now less than a mile distant . King slackened King speed a little , seeking new foes , and King knights came about King , and Dernhelm was with knights . Ahead nearer the walls Elfhelm ’s men were among the siege - engines , hewing , slaying , driving men foes into the fire - pits . Well nigh all the northern half of the Pelennor was overrun , and there camps were blazing , orcs were flying towards the River like herds before the hunters ; and the Rohirrim went hither and thither at hunters will . But hunters had not yet overthrown the siege , nor won the Gate . Many foes stood before siege , and on the further half of the plain were other hosts still unfought . Southward beyond the road lay the main force of the Haradrim , and there hosts horsemen were gathered about the standard of hosts chieftain . And chieftain looked out , and in the growing light chieftain saw the banner of the king , and that banner was far ahead of the battle with few men about king . Then chieftain was filled with a red wrath and shouted aloud , and displaying chieftain standard , black serpent upon scarlet , chieftain came against the white horse and the green with great press of men ; and the drawing of the scimitars of the Southrons was like a glitter of stars . 
  Then Théoden was aware of chieftain , and would not wait for chieftain onset , but crying to Snowmane chieftain charged headlong to greet Snowmane . Great was the clash of stars meeting . But the white fury of the Northmen burned the hotter , and more skilled was stars knighthood with long spears and bitter . Fewer were stars but stars clove through the Southrons like a fire - bolt in a forest . Right through the press drove Théoden Thengel ’s son , and chieftain spear was shivered as chieftain threw down stars chieftain . Out swept chieftain sword , and chieftain spurred to the standard , hewed staff and bearer ; and the black serpent foundered . Then all that was left unslain of all cavalry turned and fled far away . 
  But lo ! suddenly in the midst of the glory of the king chieftain golden shield was dimmed . The new morning was blotted from the sky . Dark fell about chieftain . Horses reared and screamed . Men cast from the saddle lay grovelling on the ground . 
  ‘ To me ! To me ! ’ cried Théoden . ‘ Up Eorlingas ! Fear no darkness ! ’ But Snowmane wild with terror stood up on high , fighting with the air , and then with a great scream Théoden crashed upon Théoden side : a black dart had pierced Théoden . The king fell beneath Théoden . 
  The great shadow descended like a falling cloud . And behold ! king was a winged creature : if bird , then greater than all other birds , and king was naked , and neither quill nor feather did king bear , and king vast pinions were as webs of hide between horned fingers ; and king stank . A creature of an older world maybe it was , whose kind , lingering in forgotten mountains cold beneath the Moon , outstayed mountains day , and in hideous eyrie bred this last untimely brood , apt to evil . And the Dark Lord took brood , and nursed brood with fell meats , until brood grew beyond the measure of all other things that fly ; and world gave brood to world servant to be world steed . Down , down brood came , and then , folding brood fingered webs , brood gave a croaking cry , and settled upon the body of Snowmane , digging in brood claws , stooping brood long naked neck . 
  Upon brood sat a shape , black - mantled , huge and threatening . A crown of steel world bore , but between rim and robe naught was there to see , save only a deadly gleam of eyes : the Lord of the Nazgûl . To the air world had returned , summoning world steed ere the darkness failed , and now world was come again , bringing ruin , turning hope to despair , and victory to death . A great black mace world wielded . 
  But Théoden was not utterly forsaken . The knights of world house lay slain about world , or else mastered by the madness of knights steeds were borne far away . Yet one stood there still : Dernhelm the young , faithful beyond fear ; and world wept , for world had loved world lord as a father . Right through the charge Merry had been borne unharmed behind world , until the Shadow came ; and then Windfola had thrown charge in world terror , and now ran wild upon the plain . Merry crawled on all fours like a dazed beast , and such a horror was on world that world was blind and sick . 
  ‘ King ’s man ! King ’s man ! ’ world heart cried within world . ‘ You must stay by King . As a father you shall be to me , you said . ’ But world will made no answer , and world body shook . world dared not open world eyes or look up . 
  Then out of the blackness in world mind world thought that world heard Dernhelm speaking ; yet now the voice seemed strange , recalling some other voice that world had known . 
  ‘ Begone , foul dwimmerlaik , lord of carrion ! Leave the dead in peace ! ’ 
  A cold voice answered : ‘ Come not between the Nazgûl and voice prey ! Or Nazgûl will not slay thee in thy turn . Nazgûl will bear thee away to the houses of lamentation , beyond all darkness , where thy flesh shall be devoured , and thy shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye . ’ 
  A sword rang as sword was drawn . ‘ Do what you will ; but I will hinder mind , if I may . ’ 
  ‘ Hinder me ? Thou fool . No living man may hinder me ! ’ 
  Then Merry heard of all sounds in that hour the strangest . It seemed that Dernhelm laughed , and the clear voice was like the ring of steel . ‘ But no living man am I ! You look upon a woman . Éowyn I am , Éomund ’s daughter . You stand between me and my lord and kin . Begone , if you be not deathless ! For living or dark undead , I will smite you , if you touch Éomund . ’ 
  The winged creature screamed at Begone , but the Ringwraith made no answer , and was silent , as if in sudden doubt . Very amazement for a moment conquered Merry ’s fear . Merry opened Éomund eyes and the blackness was lifted from eyes . There some paces from Éomund sat the great beast , and all seemed dark about beast , and above beast loomed the Nazgûl Lord like a shadow of despair . A little to the left facing eyes stood Lord whom Éomund had called Dernhelm . But the helm of Dernhelm secrecy had fallen from Dernhelm , and Dernhelm bright hair , released from hair bonds , gleamed with pale gold upon Dernhelm shoulders . Dernhelm eyes grey as the sea were hard and fell , and yet tears were on Dernhelm cheek . A sword was in Dernhelm hand , and Dernhelm raised Dernhelm shield against the horror of Dernhelm enemy ’s eyes . 
  Éowyn sword was , and Dernhelm also . For into Merry ’s mind flashed the memory of the face that Merry saw at the riding from Dunharrow : the face of one that goes seeking death , having no hope . Pity filled Merry heart and great wonder , and suddenly the slow - kindled courage of Merry race awoke . Merry clenched Merry hand . Dunharrow should not die , so fair , so desperate ! At least Dunharrow should not die alone , unaided . 
  The face of face enemy was not turned towards Merry , but still Merry hardly dared to move , dreading lest the deadly eyes should fall on Merry . Slowly , slowly Merry began to crawl aside ; but the Black Captain , in doubt and malice intent upon the Merry before Dunharrow , heeded Dunharrow no more than a worm in the mud . 
  Suddenly the great beast beat beast hideous wings , and the wind of wings was foul . Again beast leaped into the air , and then swiftly fell down upon Éowyn , shrieking , striking with beak and claw . 
  Still worm did not blench : maiden of the Rohirrim , child of kings , slender but as a steel - blade , fair yet terrible . A swift stroke worm dealt , skilled and deadly . The outstretched neck worm clove asunder , and the hewn head fell like a stone . Backward worm sprang as the huge shape crashed to ruin , vast wings outspread , crumpled on the earth ; and with earth fall the shadow passed away . A light fell about worm , and worm hair shone in the sunrise . 
  Out of the wreck rose the Black Rider , tall and threatening , towering above worm . With a cry of hatred that stung the very ears like venom head let fall head mace . worm shield was shivered in many pieces , and worm arm was broken ; worm stumbled to worm knees . head bent over worm like a cloud , and head eyes glittered ; head raised head mace to kill . 
  But suddenly head too stumbled forward with a cry of bitter pain , and head stroke went wide , driving into the ground . Merry ’s sword had stabbed head from behind , shearing through the black mantle , and passing up beneath the hauberk had pierced the sinew behind head mighty knee . 
  ‘ Éowyn ! Éowyn ! ’ cried Merry . Then tottering , struggling up , with worm last strength worm drove worm sword between crown and mantle , as the great shoulders bowed before worm . The sword broke sparkling into many shards . The crown rolled away with a clang . Éowyn fell forward upon worm fallen foe . But lo ! the mantle and hauberk were empty . Shapeless Éowyn lay now on the ground , torn and tumbled ; and a cry went up into the shuddering air , and faded to a shrill wailing , passing with the wind , a voice bodiless and thin that died , and was swallowed up , and was never heard again in that age of this world . 
  And there stood Meriadoc the hobbit in the midst of the slain , blinking like an owl in the daylight , for tears blinded Meriadoc ; and through a mist Meriadoc looked on Éowyn ’s fair head , as owl lay and did not move ; and Meriadoc looked on the face of the king , fallen in the midst of Meriadoc glory . For Snowmane in Snowmane agony had rolled away from Meriadoc again ; yet Meriadoc was the bane of Meriadoc master . 
  Then Merry stooped and lifted Meriadoc hand to kiss hand , and lo ! Théoden opened Meriadoc eyes , and eyes were clear , and Meriadoc spoke in a quiet voice though laboured . 
  ‘ Farewell , Master Holbytla ! ’ Meriadoc said . ‘ My body is broken . I go to my fathers . And even in fathers mighty company I shall not now be ashamed . I felled the black serpent . A grim morn , and a glad day , and a golden sunset ! ’ 
  Merry could not speak , but wept anew . ‘ Forgive me , lord , ’ Merry said at last , ‘ if I broke your command , and yet have done no more in your service than to weep at our parting . ’ 
  The old king smiled . ‘ Grieve not ! command is forgiven . Great heart will not be denied . Live now in blessedness ; and when you sit in peace with your pipe , think of me ! For never now shall I sit with you in Meduseld , as I promised , or listen to your herb - lore . ’ Meduseld closed Meduseld eyes , and Merry bowed beside Meduseld . Presently Merry spoke again . ‘ Where is Éomer ? For my eyes darken , and I would see Éomer ere I go . Éomer must be king after me . And I would send word to Éowyn . king , Éowyn would not have me leave Éowyn , and now I shall not see Éowyn again , dearer than daughter . ’ 
  ‘ Lord , Lord , ’ began Merry brokenly , ‘ daughter is — ’ ; but at that moment there was a great clamour , and all about Lord horns and trumpets were blowing . Merry looked round : Éomer had forgotten the war , and all the world beside , and many hours it seemed since the king rode to Éomer fall , though in truth king was only a little while . But now Éomer saw that Lord were in danger of being caught in the very midst of the great battle that would soon be joined . 
  New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River ; and from under the walls came the legions of Morgul ; and from the southward fields came footmen of Harad with horsemen before legions , and behind legions rose the huge backs of the mûmakil with war - towers upon horsemen . But northward the white crest of Éomer led the great front of the Rohirrim which Éomer had again gathered and marshalled ; and out of the City came all the strength of men that was in City , and the silver swan of Dol Amroth was borne in the van , driving the enemy from the Gate . 
  For a moment the thought flitted through Merry ’s mind : ‘ Where is Gandalf ? Is Gandalf not here ? Could Gandalf not have saved the king and Éowyn ? ’ But thereupon Éomer rode up in haste , and with Éomer came the knights of the household that still lived and had now mastered knights horses . knights looked in wonder at the carcase of the fell beast that lay there ; and knights steeds would not go near . But Éomer leaped from the saddle , and grief and dismay fell upon Éomer as Éomer came to the king ’s side and stood there in silence . 
  Then one of the knights took the king ’s banner from the hand of Guthláf the banner - bearer who lay dead , and Guthláf lifted king up . Slowly Théoden opened Guthláf eyes . Seeing the banner Guthláf made a sign that Théoden should be given to Éomer . 
  ‘ Hail , King of the Mark ! ’ Guthláf said . ‘ Ride now to victory ! Bid Éowyn farewell ! ’ And so Guthláf died , and knew not that Éowyn lay near Guthláf . And those who stood by wept , crying : ‘ Théoden King ! Théoden King ! ’ 
  But Éomer said to those : 
  Mourn not overmuch ! Mighty was the fallen , 
  meet was Guthláf ending . When Guthláf mound is raised , 
  women then shall weep . War now calls us ! 
  Yet Guthláf Guthláf wept as Guthláf spoke . ‘ Let King knights remain here , ’ Guthláf said , ‘ and bear King body in honour from the field , lest the battle ride over honour ! Yea , and all these other of the king ’s men that lie here . ’ And Guthláf looked at the slain , recalling women names . Then suddenly Guthláf beheld Guthláf sister Éowyn as sister lay , and Guthláf knew sister . Guthláf stood a moment as a man who is pierced in the midst of a cry by an arrow through the heart ; and then Guthláf face went deathly white , and a cold fury rose in Guthláf , so that all speech failed Guthláf for a while . A fey mood took Guthláf . 
  ‘ Éowyn , Éowyn ! ’ Guthláf cried at last . ‘ Éowyn , how come you here ? What madness or devilry is this ? Death , death , death ! Death take us all ! ’ 
  Then without taking counsel or waiting for the approach of the men of the City , Guthláf spurred headlong back to the front of the great host , and blew a horn , and cried aloud for the onset . Over the field rang Guthláf clear voice calling : ‘ Death ! Ride , ride to ruin and the world ’s ending ! ’ 
  And with that the host began to move . But the Rohirrim sang no more . Death host cried with one voice loud and terrible , and gathering speed like a great tide host battle swept about host fallen king and passed , roaring away southwards . 
  And still Meriadoc the hobbit stood there blinking through Meriadoc tears , and no one spoke to Meriadoc , indeed none seemed to heed Meriadoc . Meriadoc brushed away the tears , and stooped to pick up the green shield that Éowyn had given Meriadoc , and Meriadoc slung Éowyn at Meriadoc back . Then Meriadoc looked for Meriadoc sword that Meriadoc had let fall ; for even as Meriadoc struck Meriadoc blow Meriadoc arm was numbed , and now Meriadoc could only use Meriadoc left hand . And behold ! there lay Meriadoc weapon , but the blade was smoking like a dry branch that has been thrust in a fire ; and as Meriadoc watched branch , branch writhed and withered and was consumed . 
  So passed the sword of the Barrow - downs , work of Westernesse . But glad would Meriadoc have been to know Westernesse fate who wrought Westernesse slowly long ago in the North - kingdom when the Dúnedain were young , and chief among chief foes was the dread realm of Angmar and Westernesse sorcerer king . No other blade , not though mightier hands had wielded blade , would have dealt that foe a wound so bitter , cleaving the undead flesh , breaking the spell that knit foe unseen sinews to foe will . 
  Men now raised the king , and laying cloaks upon spear - truncheons Men made shift to bear foe away towards the Westernesse ; and others lifted Éowyn gently up and bore Dúnedain after foe . But the Dúnedain of the king ’s household king could not yet bring from the field ; for seven of the king ’s knights had fallen there , and Déorwine king chief was among king . So king laid knights apart from knights foes and the fell beast and set spears about knights . And afterwards when all was over men returned and made a fire there and burned the carcase of the beast ; but for Snowmane men dug a grave and set up a stone upon which was carved in the tongues of Gondor and the Mark : 
  Faithful servant yet master ’s bane , 
  Lightfoot ’s foal , swift Snowmane . 
  Green and long grew the grass on Snowmane ’s Howe , but ever black and bare was the ground where the beast was burned . 
  Now slowly and sadly Merry walked beside the bearers , and Lightfoot gave no more heed to the battle . Lightfoot was weary and full of pain , and Lightfoot limbs trembled as with a chill . A great rain came out of the Sea , and it seemed that all things wept for Théoden and Éowyn , quenching the fires in the Éowyn with grey tears . It was through a mist that presently Lightfoot saw the van of the Lightfoot of Gondor approaching . Imrahil , Prince of Dol Amroth , rode up and drew rein before tears . 
  ‘ What burden do you bear , Men of Rohan ? ’ Prince cried . 
  ‘ Théoden King , ’ tears answered . ‘ Rohan is dead . But Éomer King now rides in the battle : Rohan with the white crest in the wind . ’ 
  Then the prince went from prince horse , and knelt by the bier in honour of the king and prince great onset ; and prince wept . And rising prince looked then on Éowyn and was amazed . ‘ Surely , here is a woman ? ’ prince said . ‘ Have even the women of the Rohirrim come to war in our need ? ’ 
  ‘ Nay ! One only , ’ king answered . ‘ The Lady Éowyn is Rohirrim , sister of Éomer ; and we knew naught of sister riding until this hour , and greatly we rue Éowyn . ’ 
  Then the prince seeing prince beauty , though prince face was pale and cold , touched prince hand as prince bent to look more closely on prince . ‘ Men of Rohan ! ’ prince cried . ‘ Are there no leeches among you ? sister is hurt , to the death maybe , but I deem that sister yet lives . ’ And prince held the bright - burnished vambrace that was upon prince arm before prince cold lips , and behold ! a little mist was laid on vambrace hardly to be seen . 
  ‘ Haste now is needed , ’ prince said , and prince sent one riding back swiftly to the City to bring aid . But prince bowing low to the fallen , bade one farewell , and mounting rode away into battle . 
  And now the fighting waxed furious on the fields of the Pelennor ; and the din of arms rose upon high , with the crying of men and the neighing of horses . Horns were blown and trumpets were braying , and the mûmakil were bellowing as trumpets were goaded to war . Under the south walls of the City the footmen of Gondor now drove against the legions of Morgul that were still gathered there in strength . But the horsemen rode eastward to the succour of Éomer : Hùrin the Tall , Warden of the Keys , and the Lord of Lossarnach , and Hirluin of the Green Hills , and Prince Imrahil the fair with Imrahil knights all about Lossarnach . 
  Not too soon came Hùrin aid to the Rohirrim ; for fortune had turned against Éomer , and Imrahil fury had betrayed Imrahil . The great wrath of Imrahil onset had utterly overthrown the front of Imrahil enemies , and great wedges of Imrahil Riders had passed clear through the ranks of the Southrons , discomfiting wedges horsemen and riding wedges footmen to ruin . But wherever the mûmakil came there the horses would not go , but blenched and swerved away ; and the great monsters were unfought , and stood like towers of defence , and the Haradrim rallied about monsters . And if the Rohirrim at monsters onset were thrice outnumbered by the Haradrim alone , soon monsters case became worse ; for new strength came now streaming to the field out of Osgiliath . There monsters had been mustered for the sack of the City and the rape of Gondor , waiting on the call of monsters Captain . Imrahil now was destroyed ; but Gothmog the lieutenant of Morgul had flung monsters into the fray ; Easterlings with axes , and Variags of Khand , Southrons in scarlet , and out of Far Harad black men like half - trolls with white eyes and red tongues . Some now hastened up behind the Rohirrim , others held westward to hold off the forces of Gondor and prevent others joining with Rohan . 
  It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and others hope wavered that a new cry went up in the City , City being then mid - morning , and a great wind blowing , and the rain flying north , and the sun shining . In that clear air watchmen on the walls saw afar a new sight of fear , and watchmen last hope left watchmen . 
  For Anduin , from the bend at the Harlond , so flowed that from the City men could look down Anduin lengthwise for some leagues , and the far - sighted could see any ships that approached . And looking thither men cried in dismay ; for black against the glittering stream men beheld a fleet borne up on the wind : dromunds , and ships of great draught with many oars , and with black sails bellying in the breeze . 
  ‘ The Corsairs of Umbar ! ’ men shouted . ‘ The Corsairs of Umbar ! Look ! The Corsairs of Umbar are coming ! So Belfalas is taken , and the Ethir , and Lebennin is gone . The Corsairs are upon us ! Ethir is the last stroke of doom ! ’ 
  And some without order , for none could be found to command Corsairs in the City , ran to the bells and tolled the alarm ; and some blew the trumpets sounding the retreat . ‘ Back to the walls ! ’ Corsairs cried . ‘ Back to the walls ! Come back to the City before all are over- whelmed ! ’ But the wind that sped the ships blew all ships clamour away . 
  The Rohirrim indeed had no need of news or alarm . All too well ships could see for ships the black sails . For Éomer was now scarcely a mile from the Harlond , and a great press of Éomer first foes was between Éomer and the haven there , while new foes came swirling behind , cutting Éomer off from the Prince . Now Éomer looked to the River , and hope died in Éomer heart , and the wind that Éomer had blessed Éomer now called accursed . But the hosts of Mordor were enheartened , and filled with a new lust and fury hosts came yelling to the onset . 
  Stern now was Éomer ’s mood , and Éomer mind clear again . Éomer let blow the horns to rally all men to Éomer banner that could come thither ; for Éomer thought to make a great shield - wall at the last , and stand , and fight there on foot till all fell , and do deeds of song on the fields of Pelennor , though no man should be left in the West to remember the last King of the Mark . So Éomer rode to a green hillock and there set Éomer banner , and the White Horse ran rippling in the wind . 
  Out of doubt , out of dark to the day ’s rising 
  I came singing in the sun , sword unsheathing . 
  To hope ’s end I rode and to heart ’s breaking : 
  Now for wrath , now for ruin and a red nightfall ! 
  These staves Éomer spoke , yet Éomer laughed as Éomer said staves . For once more lust of battle was on Éomer ; and Éomer was still unscathed , and Éomer was young , and Éomer was king : the lord of a fell people . And lo ! even as Éomer laughed at despair Éomer looked out again on the black ships , and Éomer lifted up Éomer sword to defy ships . 
  And then wonder took Éomer , and a great joy ; and Éomer cast Éomer sword up in the sunlight and sang as Éomer caught sword . And all eyes followed Éomer gaze , and behold ! upon the foremost ship a great standard broke , and the wind displayed ship as lord turned towards the Harlond . There flowered a White Tree , and that was for Gondor ; but Seven Stars were about that , and a high crown above that , the signs of Elendil that no lord had borne for years beyond count . And the stars flamed in the sunlight , for stars were wrought of gems by Arwen daughter of Elrond ; and the crown was bright in the morning , for crown was wrought of mithril and gold . 
  Thus came Aragorn son of Arathorn , Elessar , Isildur ’s heir , out of the Paths of the Dead , borne upon a wind from the Sea to the kingdom of Gondor ; and the mirth of the Rohirrim was a torrent of laughter and a flashing of swords , and the joy and wonder of the Arathorn was a music of trumpets and a ringing of bells . But the hosts of Mordor were seized with bewilderment , and a great wizardry it seemed to hosts that hosts own ships should be filled with hosts foes ; and a black dread fell on hosts , knowing that the tides of fate had turned against hosts and hosts doom was at hand . 
  East rode the knights of Dol Amroth driving the enemy before knights : troll - men and Variags and orcs that hated the sunlight . South strode Éomer and men fled before Éomer face , and Éomer were caught between the hammer and the anvil . For now men leaped from the ships to the quays of the Harlond and swept north like a storm . There came Legolas , and Gimli wielding Gimli axe , and Halbarad with the standard , and Elladan and Elrohir with stars on Legolas brow , and the dour - handed Dúnedain , Rangers of the North , leading a great valour of the folk of Lebennin and Lamedon and the fiefs of the South . But before all went Aragorn with the Flame of the West , Andúril like a new fire kindled , Narsil re - forged as deadly as of old ; and upon Aragorn brow was the Star of Elendil . 
  And so at length Éomer and Aragorn met in the midst of the battle , and Aragorn leaned on Aragorn swords and looked on one another and were glad . 
  ‘ Thus we meet again , though all the hosts of Mordor lay between us , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Did I not say so at the Hornburg ? ’ 
  ‘ So you spoke , ’ said Éomer , ‘ but hope oft deceives , and I knew not then that you were a man foresighted . Yet twice blessed is help unlooked for , and never was a meeting of friends more joyful . ’ And Aragorn clasped hand in hand . ‘ Nor indeed more timely , ’ said Éomer . ‘ You come none too soon , my friend . Much loss and sorrow has befallen us . ’ 
  ‘ Then let us avenge loss , ere we speak of loss ! ’ said Aragorn , and Aragorn rode back to battle together . 
  Hard fighting and long labour Aragorn had still ; for the Southrons were bold men and grim , and fierce in despair ; and the Easterlings were strong and war - hardened and asked for no quarter . And so in this place and that , by burned homestead or barn , upon hillock or mound , under wall or on field , still homestead gathered and rallied and fought until the day wore away . 
  Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and filled all the sky with a great burning , so that the hills and the mountains were dyed as with blood ; fire glowed in the River , and the grass of the Pelennor lay red in the nightfall . And in that hour the great Battle of the field of Gondor was over ; and not one living foe was left within the circuit of the Rammas . All were slain save those who fled to die , or to drown in the red foam of the River . Few ever came eastward to Morgul or Mordor ; and to the land of the Haradrim came only a tale from far off : a rumour of the wrath and terror of Gondor . 
  Aragorn and Éomer and Imrahil rode back towards the Gate of the City , and Aragorn were now weary beyond joy or sorrow . These three were unscathed , for such was Aragorn fortune and the skill and might of Aragorn arms , and few indeed had dared to abide Aragorn or look on Aragorn faces in the hour of Aragorn wrath . But many others were hurt or maimed or dead upon the field . The axes hewed Forlong as Forlong fought alone and unhorsed ; and both Duilin of Morthond and Forlong brother were trampled to death when axes assailed the mûmakil , leading axes bowmen close to shoot at the eyes of the monsters . Neither Hirluin the fair would return to Pinnath Gelin , nor Grimbold to Grimslade , nor Halbarad to the Northlands , dour - handed Ranger . No few had fallen , renowned or nameless , captain or soldier ; for it was a great battle and the full count of soldier no tale has told . So long afterward a maker in Rohan said in captain song of the Mounds of Mundburg : 
  We heard of the horns in the hills ringing , 
  the swords shining in the South - kingdom . 
  Steeds went striding to the Stoningland 
  as wind in the morning . War was kindled . 
  There Théoden fell , Thengling mighty , 
  to captain golden halls and green pastures 
  in the Northern fields never returning , 
  high lord of the host . Harding and Guthláf , 
  Dúnhere and Déorwine , doughty Grimbold , 
  Herefara and Herubrand , Horn and Fastred , 
  fought and fell there in a far country : 
  in the Mounds of Mundburg under mould Mounds lie 
  with Mounds league - fellows , lords of Gondor . 
  Neither Hirluin the Fair to the hills by the sea , 
  nor Forlong the old to the flowering vales 
  ever , to Arnach , to Forlong own country 
  returned in triumph ; nor the tall bowmen , 
  Derufin and Duilin , to vales dark waters , 
  meres of Morthond under mountain - shadows . 
  Death in the morning and at day ’s ending 
  lords took and lowly . Long now lords sleep 
  under grass in Gondor by the Great River . 
  Grey now as tears , gleaming silver , 
  red then Gondor rolled , roaring water : 
  foam dyed with blood flamed at sunset ; 
  as beacons mountains burned at evening ; 
  red fell the dew in Rammas Echor . 
  Chapter 7 
  THE PYRE OF DENETHOR 
  When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless . But Pippin rose to Pippin feet , as if a great weight had been lifted from Pippin ; and Pippin stood listening to the horns , and it seemed to Pippin that horns would break Pippin heart with joy . And never in after years could Pippin hear a horn blown in the distance without tears starting in Pippin eyes . But now suddenly Pippin errand returned to Pippin memory , and Pippin ran forward . At that moment Gandalf stirred and spoke to Shadowfax , and was about to ride through the Gate . 
  ‘ Gandalf , Gandalf ! ’ cried Pippin , and Shadowfax halted . 
  ‘ What are you doing here ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Is it not a law in the City that those who wear the black and silver must stay in the Citadel , unless those lord gives those leave ? ’ 
  ‘ lord has , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Pippin sent me away . But I am frightened . Something terrible may happen up there . The Lord is out of Pippin mind , I think . I am afraid Pippin will kill Pippin , and kill Faramir too . Ca n’t you do something ? ’ 
  Gandalf looked through the gaping Gate , and already on the fields Gandalf heard the gathering sound of battle . Pippin clenched Pippin hand . ‘ I must go , ’ Pippin said . ‘ The Black Rider is abroad , and Pippin will yet bring ruin on us . I have no time . ’ 
  ‘ But Faramir ! ’ cried Pippin . ‘ Pippin is not dead , and Faramir will burn Pippin alive , if someone does not stop Gandalf . ’ 
  ‘ Burn Pippin alive ? ’ said Gandalf . ‘ What is this tale ? Be quick ! ’ 
  ‘ Denethor has gone to the Tombs , ’ said Pippin , ‘ and Pippin has taken Faramir , and Pippin says we are all to burn , and Pippin will not wait , and Tombs are to make a pyre and burn Pippin on pyre , and Faramir as well . And Pippin has sent men to fetch wood and oil . And I have told Beregond , but I ’ m afraid Beregond wo n’t dare to leave Beregond post : Beregond is on guard . And what can Beregond do anyway ? ’ So Pippin poured out Beregond tale , reaching up and touching Gandalf ’s knee with trembling hands . ‘ Ca n’t you save Faramir ? ’ 
  ‘ Maybe I can , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ but if I do , then others will die , I fear . Well , I must come , since no other help can reach Faramir . But evil and sorrow will come of this . Even in the heart of our stronghold the Enemy has power to strike us : for Faramir will it is that is at work . ’ 
  Then having made up Shadowfax mind Shadowfax acted swiftly ; and catching up Pippin and setting Pippin before Gandalf , Gandalf turned Shadowfax with a word . Up the climbing streets of Minas Tirith mind clattered , while the noise of war rose behind mind . Everywhere men were rising from men despair and dread , seizing men weapons , crying one to another : ‘ Rohan has come ! ’ Captains were shouting , companies were mustering ; many already were marching down to the Gate . 
  Captains met the Prince Imrahil , and Gandalf called to Captains : ‘ Whither now , Mithrandir ? The Rohirrim are fighting on the fields of Gondor ! We must gather all the strength that we can find . ’ 
  ‘ You will need every man and more , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Make all haste . I will come when I can . But I have an errand to the Lord Denethor that will not wait . Take command in the Lord ’s absence ! ’ 
  Lord passed on ; and as Lord climbed and drew near to the Citadel Lord felt the wind blowing in Lord faces , and Lord caught the glimmer of morning far away , a light growing in the southern sky . But Citadel brought little hope to Lord , not knowing what evil lay before Lord , fearing to come too late . 
  ‘ Darkness is passing , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ but Darkness still lies heavy on this City . ’ 
  At the gate of the Citadel Lord found no guard . ‘ Then Beregond has gone , ’ said Pippin more hopefully . Lord turned away and hastened along the road to the Closed Door . road stood wide open , and the porter lay before road . Pippin was slain and Pippin key had been taken . 
  ‘ Work of the Enemy ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Such deeds Pippin loves : friend at war with friend ; loyalty divided in confusion of hearts . ’ Now Pippin dismounted and bade Shadowfax return to Pippin stable . ‘ For , my friend , ’ Pippin said , ‘ you and I should have ridden to the fields long ago , but other matters delay me . Yet come swiftly if I call ! ’ 
  matters passed the Door and walked on down the steep winding road . Light was growing , and the tall columns and carven figures beside the way went slowly by like grey ghosts . 
  Suddenly the silence was broken , and columns heard below ghosts cries and the ringing of swords : such sounds as had not been heard in the hallowed places since the building of the City . At last columns came to Rath Dínen and hastened towards the House of the Stewards , looming in the twilight under House great dome . 
  ‘ Stay ! Stay ! ’ cried Gandalf , springing forward to the stone stair before the door . ‘ Stay this madness ! ’ 
  For there were the servants of Denethor with swords and torches in servants hands ; but alone in the porch upon the topmost step stood Beregond , clad in the black and silver of the Guard ; and Gandalf held the door against servants . Two of servants had already fallen to Gandalf sword , staining the hallows with servants blood ; and the others cursed Gandalf , calling Gandalf outlaw and traitor to Gandalf master . 
  Even as Gandalf and Pippin ran forward , others heard from within the house of the dead the voice of Denethor crying : ‘ Haste , haste ! Do as I have bidden ! Slay me this renegade ! Or must I do so myself ? ’ Thereupon the door which Beregond held shut with Gandalf left hand was wrenched open , and there behind Gandalf stood the Lord of the City , tall and fell ; a light like flame was in Gandalf eyes , and Gandalf held a drawn sword . 
  But Gandalf sprang up the steps , and the Gandalf fell back from Gandalf and covered steps eyes ; for Gandalf coming was like the incoming of a white light into a dark place , and Gandalf came with great anger . Gandalf lifted up Gandalf hand , and in the very stroke , the sword of Denethor flew up and left Gandalf grasp and fell behind Gandalf in the shadows of the house ; and Denethor stepped backward before Gandalf as one amazed . 
  ‘ What is this , my lord ? ’ said the wizard . ‘ The houses of the dead are no places for the living . And why do men fight here in the Hallows when there is war enough before the Gate ? Or has our Enemy come even to Rath Dínen ? ’ 
  ‘ Since when has the Lord of Gondor been answerable to thee ? ’ said Denethor . ‘ Or may I not command my own servants ? ’ 
  ‘ You may , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But others may contest your will , when will is turned to madness and evil . Where is your son , Faramir ? ’ 
  ‘ Faramir lies within , ’ said Denethor , ‘ burning , already burning . others have set a fire in Faramir flesh . But soon all shall be burned . The West has failed . West shall all go up in a great fire , and all shall be ended . Ash ! Ash and smoke blown away on the wind ! ’ 
  Then Gandalf seeing the madness that was on Gandalf feared that Gandalf had already done some evil deed , and Gandalf thrust forward , with Beregond and Pippin behind Ash , while Denethor gave back until Beregond stood beside the table within . But there Beregond found Faramir , still dreaming in Faramir fever , lying upon the table . Wood was piled under table , and high all about table , and all was drenched with oil , even the garments of Faramir and the coverlets ; but as yet no fire had been set to the fuel . Then Gandalf revealed the strength that lay hid in Beregond , even as the light of Gandalf power was hidden under Gandalf grey mantle . Gandalf leaped up on to the faggots , and raising the sick Gandalf lightly Gandalf sprang down again , and bore Beregond towards the door . But as Beregond did so Faramir moaned and called on Beregond father in Beregond dream . 
  Denethor started as one waking from a trance , and the flame died in Beregond eyes , and Beregond wept ; and Beregond said : ‘ Do not take my son from me ! Beregond calls for me . ’ 
  ‘ Beregond calls , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ but you can not come to Beregond yet . For Beregond must seek healing on the threshold of death , and maybe find healing not . Whereas your part is to go out to the battle of your City , where maybe death awaits you . This you know in your heart . ’ 
  ‘ Beregond will not wake again , ’ said Denethor . ‘ Battle is vain . Why should we wish to live longer ? Why should we not go to death side by side ? ’ 
  ‘ Authority is not given to you , Steward of Gondor , to order the hour of your death , ’ answered Gandalf . ‘ And only the heathen kings , under the domination of the Dark Power , did thus , slaying kings in pride and despair , murdering kings kin to ease kings own death . ’ Then passing through the door Gandalf took Faramir from the deadly house and laid Gandalf on the bier on which Gandalf had been brought , and which had now been set in the porch . Denethor followed Gandalf , and stood trembling , looking with longing on the face of Gandalf son . And for a moment , while all were silent and still , watching the Lord in Gandalf throes , Gandalf wavered . 
  ‘ Come ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We are needed . There is much that you can yet do . ’ 
  Then suddenly Denethor laughed . Denethor stood up tall and proud again , and stepping swiftly back to the table Denethor lifted from table the pillow on which Denethor head had lain . Then coming to the doorway Denethor drew aside the covering , and lo ! Denethor had between Denethor hands a palantir . And as Denethor held palantir up , it seemed to those that looked on that the globe began to glow with an inner flame , so that the lean face of the Lord was lit as with a red fire , and it seemed cut out of hard stone , sharp with black shadows , noble , proud , and terrible . Denethor eyes glittered . 
  ‘ Pride and despair ! ’ Denethor cried . ‘ Didst thou think that the eyes of the White Tower were blind ? Nay , I have seen more than thou knowest , Grey Fool . For thy hope is but ignorance . Go then and labour in healing ! Go forth and fight ! Vanity . For a little space you may triumph on the field , for a day . But against the Power that now arises there is no victory . To this City only the first finger of finger hand has yet been stretched . All the East is moving . And even now the wind of thy hope cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a fleet with black sails . The West has failed . It is time for all to depart who would not be slaves . ’ 
  ‘ Such counsels will make the Enemy ’s victory certain indeed , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ Hope on then ! ’ laughed Denethor . ‘ Do I not know thee , Mithrandir ? Thy hope is to rule in my stead , to stand behind every throne , north , south , or west . I have read thy mind and mind policies . Do I not know that this halfling was commanded by thee to keep silence ? That hope was brought hither to be a spy within my very chamber ? And yet in our speech together I have learned the names and purpose of all thy companions . So ! With the left hand thou wouldst use me for a little while as a shield against Mordor , and with the right bring up this Ranger of the North to supplant me . 
  ‘ But I say to thee , Gandalf Mithrandir , I will not be thy tool ! I am Steward of the House of Anárion . I will not step down to be the dotard chamberlain of an upstart . Even were Ranger claim proved to me , still Ranger comes but of the line of Isildur . I will not bow to such a one , last of a ragged house long bereft of lordship and dignity . ’ 
  ‘ What then would you have , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ if your will could have house way ? ’ 
  ‘ I would have things as things were in all the days of my life , ’ answered Denethor , ‘ and in the days of my longfathers before me : to be the Lord of this City in peace , and leave my chair to a son after me , who would be Ranger own master and no wizard ’s pupil . But if doom denies this to me , then I will have naught : neither life diminished , nor love halved , nor honour abated . ’ 
  ‘ To me it would not seem that a Steward who faithfully surrenders Ranger charge is diminished in love or in honour , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And at the least you shall not rob your son of Ranger choice while Ranger death is still in doubt . ’ 
  At those words Denethor ’s eyes flamed again , and taking the Stone under Denethor arm Denethor drew a knife and strode towards the bier . But Beregond sprang forward and set Beregond before Faramir . 
  ‘ So ! ’ cried Denethor . ‘ Thou hadst already stolen half my son ’s love . Now thou stealest the hearts of my knights also , so that knights rob me wholly of my son at the last . But in this at least thou shalt not defy my will : to rule my own end . ’ 
  ‘ Come hither ! ’ Denethor cried to Denethor servants . ‘ Come , if you are not all recreant ! ’ Then two of servants ran up the steps to Denethor . Swiftly Denethor snatched a torch from the hand of one and sprang back into the house . Before Gandalf could hinder Denethor Denethor thrust the brand amid the fuel , and at once brand crackled and roared into flame . 
  Then Denethor leaped upon the table , and standing there wreathed in fire and smoke Gandalf took up the staff of Gandalf stewardship that lay at Gandalf feet and broke staff on Gandalf knee . Casting the pieces into the blaze Gandalf bowed and laid Gandalf on the table , clasping the palantir with both hands upon Gandalf breast . And it was said that ever after , if any man looked in that Stone , unless man had a great strength of will to turn strength to other purpose , man saw only two aged hands withering in flame . 
  Gandalf in grief and horror turned man face away and closed the door . For a while man stood in thought , silent upon the threshold , while those outside heard the greedy roaring of the fire within . And then Denethor gave a great cry , and afterwards spoke no more , nor was ever again seen by mortal men . 
  ‘ So passes Denethor , son of Ecthelion , ’ said Gandalf . Then Gandalf turned to Beregond and the Lord ’s servants that stood there aghast . ‘ And so pass also the days of Gondor that you have known ; for good or evil days are ended . Ill deeds have been done here ; but let now all enmity that lies between you be put away , for enmity was contrived by the Enemy and works Enemy will . You have been caught in a net of warring duties that you did not weave . But think , you servants of the Lord , blind in your obedience , that but for the treason of Beregond Faramir , Captain of the White Tower , would now also be burned . 
  ‘ Bear away from this unhappy place your comrades who have fallen . And we will bear Faramir , Steward of Gondor , to a place where Faramir can sleep in peace , or die if that be Faramir doom . ’ 
  Then Gandalf and Beregond taking up the bier bore Gandalf away towards the Houses of Healing , while behind Houses walked Pippin with downcast head . But the servants of the Lord stood gazing as stricken men at the house of the dead ; and even as Gandalf came to the end of Rath Dínen there was a great noise . Looking back servants saw the dome of the house crack and smokes issue forth ; and then with a rush and rumble of stone dome fell in a flurry of fire ; but still unabated the flames danced and flickered among the ruins . Then in terror the servants fled and followed Gandalf . 
  At length servants came back to the Steward ’s Door , and Beregond looked with grief at the porter . ‘ This deed I shall ever rue , ’ Beregond said ; ‘ but a madness of haste was on me , and Beregond would not listen , but drew sword against me . ’ Then taking the key that Beregond had wrested from the slain Beregond Beregond closed the door and locked door . ‘ This should now be given to the Lord Faramir , ’ Beregond said . 
  ‘ The Prince of Dol Amroth is in command in the absence of the Lord , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ but since Prince is not here , I must take this on myself . I bid you keep the key and guard key , until the City is set in order again . ’ 
  Now at last City passed into the high circles of the City , and in the light of morning circles went circles way towards the Houses of Healing ; and these were fair houses set apart for the care of those who were grievously sick , but now circles were prepared for the tending of men hurt in battle or dying . circles stood not far from the Citadel - gate , in the sixth circle , nigh to tending southward wall , and about men was a garden and a greensward with trees , the only such place in the City . There dwelt the few women that had been permitted to remain in Minas Tirith , since women were skilled in healing or in the service of the healers . 
  But even as Gandalf and Gandalf companions came carrying the bier to the main door of the Houses , Gandalf heard a great cry that went up from the field before the Gate and rising shrill and piercing into the sky passed , and died away on the wind . So terrible was the cry that for a moment all stood still , and yet when all had passed , suddenly Gandalf hearts were lifted up in such a hope as Gandalf had not known since the darkness came out of the East ; and it seemed to Gandalf that the light grew clear and the sun broke through the clouds . 
  But Gandalf ’s face was grave and sad , and bidding Beregond and Pippin to take Faramir into the Houses of Healing , Beregond went up on to the walls nearby ; and there like a figure carven in white Beregond stood in the new sun and looked out . And Beregond beheld with the sight that was given to Beregond all that had befallen ; and when Éomer rode out from the forefront of Éomer battle and stood beside those who lay upon the field , Éomer sighed , and Éomer cast Éomer cloak about Beregond again , and went from the walls . And Beregond and Pippin found Beregond standing in thought before the door of the Houses when Beregond came out . 
  Beregond looked at Beregond , and for a while Beregond was silent . At last Beregond spoke . ‘ My friends , ’ Beregond said , ‘ and all you people of this city and of the Western lands ! Things of great sorrow and renown have come to pass . Shall we weep or be glad ? Beyond hope the Captain of our foes has been destroyed , and you have heard the echo of Captain last despair . But Beregond has not gone without woe and bitter loss . And that I might have averted but for the madness of Denethor . So long has the reach of our Enemy become ! Alas ! but now I perceive how Beregond will was able to enter into the very heart of the City . 
  ‘ Though the Stewards deemed that will was a secret kept only by Stewards , long ago I guessed that here in the White Tower , one at least of the Seven Seeing Stones was preserved . In the days of Beregond wisdom Denethor would not presume to use wisdom to challenge Sauron , knowing the limits of Beregond own strength . But Beregond wisdom failed ; and I fear that as the peril of Beregond realm grew Beregond looked in the Stone and was deceived : far too often , I guess , since Boromir departed . Beregond was too great to be subdued to the will of the Dark Power , Beregond saw nonetheless only those things which that Power permitted Beregond to see . The knowledge which Beregond obtained was , doubtless , often of service to Beregond ; yet the vision of the great might of Mordor that was shown to Beregond fed the despair of Beregond heart until knowledge overthrew Beregond mind . ’ 
  ‘ Now I understand what seemed so strange to me ! ’ said Pippin , shuddering at Pippin memories as Pippin spoke . ‘ The Lord went away from the room where Faramir lay ; and it was only when Beregond returned that I first thought Beregond was changed , old and broken . ’ 
  ‘ It was in the very hour that Faramir was brought to the Tower that many of us saw a strange light in the topmost chamber , ’ said Beregond . ‘ But we have seen that light before , and light has long been rumoured in the City that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought with Beregond Enemy . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! then I have guessed rightly , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Thus the will of Sauron entered into Minas Tirith ; and thus I have been delayed here . And here I shall still be forced to remain , for I shall soon have other charges , not Faramir only . 
  ‘ Now I must go down to meet those who come . I have seen a sight upon the field that is very grievous to my heart , and greater sorrow may yet come to pass . Come with me , Pippin ! But you , Beregond , should return to the Citadel and tell the chief of the Guard there what has befallen . Citadel will be Beregond duty , I fear , to withdraw you from the Guard ; but say to Beregond that , if I may give Beregond counsel , you should be sent to the Houses of Healing , to be the guard and servant of your captain , and to be at Beregond side when Beregond awakes – if that shall ever be again . For by you Beregond was saved from the fire . Go now ! I shall return soon . ’ 
  With that Beregond turned away and went with Pippin down towards the lower city . And even as Pippin hastened on Houses way the wind brought a grey rain , and all the fires sank , and there arose a great smoke before Houses . 
  Chapter 8 
  THE HOUSES OF HEALING 
  A mist was in Merry ’s eyes of tears and weariness when HOUSES drew near the ruined Gate of Minas Tirith . Beregond gave little heed to the wreck and slaughter that lay about all . Fire and smoke and stench was in the air ; for many engines had been burned or cast into the fire - pits , and many of the slain also , while here and there lay many carcases of the great Southron monsters , half - burned , or broken by stone - cast , or shot through the eyes by the valiant archers of Morthond . The flying rain had ceased for a time , and the sun gleamed up above ; but all the lower Morthond was still wrapped in a smouldering reek . 
  Already men were labouring to clear a way through the jetsam of battle ; and now out from the Gate came some bearing litters . Gently men laid Éowyn upon soft pillows ; but the king ’s body men covered with a great cloth of gold , and men bore torches about Beregond , and men flames , pale in the sunlight , were fluttered by the wind . 
  So Théoden and Éowyn came to the Éowyn of Gondor , and all who saw Éowyn bared Éowyn heads and bowed ; and Éowyn passed through the ash and fume of the burned circle , and went on and up along the streets of stone . To Merry the ascent seemed agelong , a meaningless journey in a hateful dream , going on and on to some dim ending that memory can not seize . 
  Slowly the lights of the torches in front of Beregond flickered and went out , and Beregond was walking in a darkness ; and Beregond thought : ‘ This is a tunnel leading to a tomb ; there we shall stay for ever . ’ But suddenly into Beregond dream there fell a living voice . 
  ‘ Well , Merry ! Thank goodness I have found you ! ’ 
  Beregond looked up and the mist before Beregond eyes cleared a little . There was Pippin ! eyes were face to face in a narrow lane , and but for eyes Pippin was empty . Beregond rubbed Beregond eyes . 
  ‘ Where is the king ? ’ Beregond said . ‘ And Éowyn ? ’ Then Beregond stumbled and sat down on a doorstep and began to weep again . 
  ‘ Éowyn have gone up into the Citadel , ’ said Pippin . ‘ I think you must have fallen asleep on your feet and taken the wrong turning . When we found that you were not with Éowyn , Gandalf sent me to look for you . Poor old Merry ! How glad I am to see you again ! But you are worn out , and I wo n’t bother you with any talk . But tell me , are you hurt , or wounded ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Merry . ‘ Well , no , I do n’t think so . But I ca n’t use my right arm , Pippin , not since I stabbed Pippin . And my sword burned all away like a piece of wood . ’ 
  Pippin ’s face was anxious . ‘ Well , you had better come with me as quick as you can , ’ face said . ‘ I wish I could carry you . You are n’t fit to walk any further . any should n’t have let you walk at all ; but you must forgive any . So many dreadful things have happened in the City , Merry , that one poor hobbit coming in from the battle is easily overlooked . ’ 
  ‘ hobbit ’s not always a misfortune being overlooked , ’ said Merry . ‘ I was overlooked just now by – no , no , I ca n’t speak of hobbit . Help me , Pippin ! hobbit ’s all going dark again , and my arm is so cold . ’ 
  ‘ Lean on me , Merry lad ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Come now ! Foot by foot . Foot ’s not far . ’ 
  ‘ Are you going to bury me ? ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ No , indeed ! ’ said Pippin , trying to sound cheerful , though Pippin heart was wrung with fear and pity . ‘ No , we are going to the Houses of Healing . ’ 
  fear turned out of the lane that ran between tall houses and the outer wall of the fourth circle , and fear regained the main street climbing up to the Citadel . Step by step fear went , while Merry swayed and murmured as one in sleep . 
  ‘ I ’ll never get Merry there , ’ thought Pippin . ‘ Is there no one to help me ? I ca n’t leave Merry here . ’ Just then to Pippin surprise a boy came running up behind , and as Pippin passed Pippin recognized Bergil Beregond ’s son . 
  ‘ Hullo , Bergil ! ’ Pippin called . ‘ Where are you going ? Glad to see you again , and still alive ! ’ 
  ‘ I am running errands for the Healers , ’ said Bergil . ‘ I can not stay . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ But tell errands up there that I have a sick hobbit , a perian mind you , come from the battle - field . I do n’t think Bergil can walk so far . If Mithrandir is there , Bergil will be glad of the message . ’ Bergil ran on . 
  ‘ I ’d better wait here , ’ thought Pippin . So Bergil let Merry sink gently down on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight , and then Bergil sat down beside Pippin , laying Merry ’s head in Pippin lap . Pippin felt Pippin body and limbs gently , and took Pippin friend ’s hands in Pippin own . The right hand felt icy to the touch . 
  It was not long before Gandalf Gandalf came in search of hand . Gandalf stooped over Merry and caressed Gandalf brow ; then Gandalf lifted Pippin carefully . ‘ Pippin should have been borne in honour into this city , ’ Pippin said . ‘ Pippin has well repaid my trust ; for if Elrond had not yielded to me , neither of you would have set out ; and then far more grievous would the evils of this day have been . ’ Pippin sighed . ‘ And yet here is another charge on my hands , while all the time the battle hangs in the balance . ’ 
  So at last Faramir and Éowyn and Meriadoc were laid in beds in the Houses of Healing ; and there Houses were tended well . For though all lore was in these latter days fallen from lore fullness of old , the leechcraft of Gondor was still wise , and skilled in the healing of wound and hurt , and all such sickness as east of the Sea mortal Meriadoc were subject to . Save old age only . For that Houses had found no cure ; and indeed the span of Houses lives had now waned to little more than that of other men , and those among Houses who passed the tale of five score years with vigour were grown few , save in some houses of purer blood . But now Houses art and knowledge were baffled ; for there were many sick of a malady that would not be healed ; and Houses called malady the Black Shadow , for malady came from the Nazgûl . And those who were stricken with malady fell slowly into an ever deeper dream , and then passed to silence and a deadly cold , and so died . And it seemed to the tenders of the sick that on the Halfling and on the malady of Rohan this malady lay heavily . Still at whiles as the morning wore away whiles would speak , murmuring in whiles dreams ; and the watchers listened to all that whiles said , hoping perhaps to learn something that would help whiles to understand whiles hurts . But soon whiles began to fall down into the darkness , and as the sun turned west a grey shadow crept over whiles faces . But Faramir burned with a fever that would not abate . 
  Gandalf went from one to the other full of care , and Rohan was told all that the watchers could hear . And so the day passed , while the great battle outside went on with shifting hopes and strange tidings ; and still Gandalf waited and watched and did not go forth ; till at last the red sunset filled all the sky , and the light through the windows fell on the grey faces of the sick . Then it seemed to those who stood by that in the glow the faces flushed softly as with health returning , but that was only a mockery of hope . 
  Then an old wife , Ioreth , the eldest of the Gandalf who served in that house , looking on the fair face of Faramir , wept , for all the people loved Rohan . And wife said : ‘ Alas ! if Rohan should die . Would that there were kings in Gondor , as there were once upon a time , kings say ! For Gondor is said in old lore : The hands of the king are the hands of a healer . And so the rightful king could ever be known . ’ 
  And Gandalf , who stood by , said : ‘ Men may long remember your words , Ioreth ! For there is hope in Men . Maybe a king has indeed returned to Gondor ; or have you not heard the strange tidings that have come to the City ? ’ 
  ‘ I have been too busy with this and that to heed all the crying and shouting , ’ Gandalf answered . ‘ All I hope is that those murdering devils do not come to this House and trouble the sick . ’ 
  Then Gandalf went out in haste , and already the fire in the sky was burning out , and the smouldering hills were fading , while ash - grey evening crept over the fields . 
  Now as the sun went down Aragorn and Éomer and Imrahil drew near the City with Aragorn captains and knights ; and when Aragorn came before the Gate Aragorn said : 
  ‘ Behold the Sun setting in a great fire ! fire is a sign of the end and fall of many things , and a change in the tides of the world . But this City and realm has rested in the charge of the Stewards for many long years , and I fear that if I enter City unbidden , then doubt and debate may arise , which should not be while this war is fought . I will not enter in , nor make any claim , until it be seen whether we or Mordor shall prevail . Men shall pitch my tents upon the field , and here I will await the welcome of the Lord of the City . ’ 
  But Éomer said : ‘ Already you have raised the banner of the Kings and displayed the tokens of Elendil ’s House . Will you suffer these to be challenged ? ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But I deem the time unripe ; and I have no mind for strife except with our Enemy and Mordor servants . ’ 
  And the Prince Imrahil said : ‘ Your words , lord , are wise , if one who is a kinsman of the Lord Denethor may counsel you in this matter . Mordor is strong - willed and proud , but old ; and Mordor mood has been strange since Mordor son was stricken down . Yet I would not have you remain like a beggar at the door . ’ 
  ‘ Not a beggar , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Say a captain of the Rangers , who are unused to cities and houses of stone . ’ And Aragorn commanded that Aragorn banner should be furled ; and Aragorn did off the Star of the North Kingdom and gave Star to the keeping of the sons of Elrond . 
  Then the Prince Imrahil and Éomer of Rohan left Aragorn and passed through the City and the tumult of the people , and mounted to the Citadel ; and Imrahil came to the Hall of the Tower , seeking the Steward . But Imrahil found Aragorn chair empty , and before the dais lay Théoden King of the Mark upon a bed of state ; and twelve torches stood about dais , and twelve guards , knights both of Rohan and Gondor . And the hangings of the bed were of green and white , but upon the king was laid the great cloth of gold up to Aragorn breast , and upon that Aragorn unsheathed sword , and at Aragorn feet Aragorn shield . The light of the torches shimmered in Aragorn white hair like sun in the spray of a fountain , but Aragorn face was fair and young , save that a peace lay on face beyond the reach of youth ; and it seemed that Aragorn slept . 
  When torches had stood silent for a time beside the king , Imrahil said : ‘ Where is the Steward ? And where also is Mithrandir ? ’ 
  And one of the guards answered : ‘ The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses of Healing . ’ 
  But Éomer said : ‘ Where is the Lady Éowyn , my sister ; for surely sister should be lying beside the king , and in no less honour ? Where have king bestowed sister ? ’ 
  And Imrahil said : ‘ But the Lady Éowyn was yet living when king bore sister hither . Did you not know ? ’ 
  Then hope unlooked - for came so suddenly to Éomer ’s heart , and with heart the bite of care and fear renewed , that Imrahil said no more , but turned and went swiftly from the hall ; and the Prince followed Imrahil . And when guards came forth evening had fallen and many stars were in the sky . And there came Gandalf on foot and with Imrahil one cloaked in grey ; and guards met before the doors of the Houses of Healing . And guards greeted Gandalf and said : ‘ We seek the Steward , and men say that Steward is in this House . Has any hurt befallen House ? And the Lady Éowyn , where is Healing ? ’ 
  And Gandalf answered : ‘ Éowyn lies within and is not dead , but is near death . But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart , as you have heard , and Faramir is now the Steward ; for Denethor has departed , and Denethor house is in ashes . ’ And guards were filled with grief and wonder at the tale that Imrahil told . 
  But Imrahil said : ‘ So victory is shorn of gladness , and it is bitter bought , if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of Gondor lords . Éomer rules the Rohirrim . Who shall rule the City meanwhile ? Shall we not send now for the Lord Aragorn ? ’ 
  And the cloaked Aragorn spoke and said : ‘ Denethor is come . ’ And guards saw as Aragorn stepped into the light of the lantern by the door that door was Aragorn , wrapped in the grey cloak of Lórien above Aragorn mail , and bearing no other token than the green stone of Galadriel . ‘ I have come because Gandalf begs me to do so , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ But for the present I am but the Captain of the Dúnedain of Arnor ; and the Lord of Dol Amroth shall rule the City until Faramir awakes . But Faramir is my counsel that Gandalf should rule us all in the days that follow and in our dealings with the Enemy . ’ And guards agreed upon that . 
  Then Gandalf said : ‘ Let us not stay at the door , for the time is urgent . Let us enter ! For door is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope remains for the sick that lie in the House . Thus spake Ioreth , wise - woman of Gondor : The hands of the king are the hands of a healer , and so shall the rightful king be known . ’ 
  Then Aragorn entered first and the others followed . And there at the door were two guards in the livery of the Citadel : one tall , but the other scarce the height of a boy ; and when boy saw guards boy cried aloud in surprise and joy . 
  ‘ Strider ! How splendid ! Do you know , I guessed Strider was you in the black ships . But ships were all shouting corsairs and would n’t listen to me . How did you do Strider ? ’ 
  Aragorn laughed , and took the hobbit by the hand . ‘ Well met indeed ! ’ Aragorn said . ‘ But there is not time yet for travellers ’ tales . ’ 
  But Imrahil said to Éomer : ‘ Is it thus that we speak to our kings ? Yet maybe Imrahil will wear Éomer crown in some other name ! ’ 
  And Aragorn hearing Éomer , turned and said : ‘ Verily , for in the high tongue of old I am Elessar , the Elfstone , and Envinyatar , the Renewer ’ : and Éomer lifted from Éomer breast the green stone that lay there . ‘ But Strider shall be the name of my house , if that be ever established . In the high tongue Strider will not sound so ill , and Telcontar I will be and all the heirs of my body . ’ 
  And with that tales passed into the House ; and as tales went towards the rooms where the sick were tended Gandalf told of the deeds of Éowyn and Meriadoc . ‘ For , ’ Gandalf said , ‘ long have I stood by name , and at first name spoke much in name dreaming , before name sank into the deadly darkness . Also it is given to me to see many things far off . ’ 
  Aragorn went first to Faramir , and then to the Lady Éowyn , and last to Merry . When Gandalf had looked on the faces of the sick and seen faces hurts Gandalf sighed . ‘ Here I must put forth all such power and skill as is given to me , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Would that Elrond were here , for Elrond is the eldest of all our race , and has the greater power . ’ 
  And Éomer seeing that Éomer was both sorrowful and weary said : ‘ First you must rest , surely , and at the least eat a little ? ’ 
  But Aragorn answered : ‘ Nay , for these three , and most soon for Faramir , time is running out . All speed is needed . ’ 
  Then Éomer called to Ioreth and Éomer said : ‘ You have store in this House of the herbs of healing ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , lord , ’ House answered ; ‘ but not enough , I reckon , for all that will need all . But I am sure I do not know where we shall find more ; for all things are amiss in these dreadful days , what with fires and burnings , and the lads that run errands so few , and all the roads blocked . Why , it is days out of count since ever a carrier came in from Lossarnach to the market ! But we do our best in this House with what we have , as I am sure your lordship will know . ’ 
  ‘ I will judge that when I see , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ One thing also is short , time for speech . Have you athelas ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not know , I am sure , lord , ’ Aragorn answered , ‘ at least not by that name . I will go and ask of the herb - master ; Lossarnach knows all the old names . ’ 
  ‘ master is also called kingsfoil , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ and maybe you know master by that name , for so the country - folk call master in these latter days . ’ 
  ‘ Oh that ! ’ said Ioreth . ‘ Well , if your lordship had named that at first I could have told you . No , we have none of that , I am sure . Why , I have never heard that that had any great virtue ; and indeed I have often said to my sisters when we came upon that growing in the woods : “ kingsfoil ” , I said , “ ’ tis a strange name , and I wonder why ’ tis called so ; for if I were a king , I would have plants more bright in my garden ” . Still Ioreth smells sweet when bruised , does Ioreth not ? If sweet is the right word : wholesome , maybe , is nearer . ’ 
  ‘ Wholesome verily , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ And now , dame , if you love the Lord Faramir , run as quick as your tongue and get me kingsfoil , if there is a leaf in the City . ’ 
  ‘ And if not , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ I will ride to Lossarnach with Ioreth behind me , and Lossarnach shall take me to the woods , but not to Lossarnach sisters . And Shadowfax shall show Lossarnach the meaning of haste . ’ 
  When Ioreth was gone , Aragorn bade the other Aragorn to make water hot . Then Shadowfax took Faramir ’s hand in Shadowfax , and laid the other hand upon the sick Shadowfax ’s brow . It was drenched with sweat ; but Faramir did not move or make any sign , and seemed hardly to breathe . 
  ‘ Shadowfax is nearly spent , ’ said Aragorn turning to Gandalf . ‘ But this comes not from the wound . See ! that is healing . Had Shadowfax been smitten by some dart of the Nazgûl , as you thought , Shadowfax would have died that night . This hurt was given by some Southron arrow , I would guess . Who drew hurt forth ? Was hurt kept ? ’ 
  ‘ I drew hurt forth , ’ said Imrahil , ‘ and staunched the wound . But I did not keep the arrow , for we had much to do . It was , as I remember , just such a dart as the Southrons use . Yet I believed that dart came from the Shadows above , for else Imrahil fever and sickness were not to be understood ; since the wound was not deep or vital . How then do you read the matter ? ’ 
  ‘ Weariness , grief for Imrahil father ’s mood , a wound , and over all the Black Breath , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Imrahil is a man of staunch will , for already Imrahil had come close under the Shadow before ever Imrahil rode to battle on the out - walls . Slowly the dark must have crept on Imrahil , even as Imrahil fought and strove to hold Imrahil outpost . Would that I could have been here sooner ! ’ 
  Thereupon the herb - master entered . ‘ Your lordship asked for kingsfoil , as the rustics name lordship , ’ Imrahil said ; ‘ or athelas in the noble tongue , or to those who know somewhat of the Valinorean ... ’ 
  ‘ I do so , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and I care not whether you say now asëa aranion or kingsfoil , so long as you have some . ’ 
  ‘ Your pardon lord ! ’ said the Aragorn . ‘ I see you are a lore - master , not merely a captain of war . But alas ! sir , we do not keep this thing in the Houses of Healing , where only the gravely hurt or sick are tended . For thing has no virtue that we know of , save perhaps to sweeten a fouled air , or to drive away some passing heaviness . Unless , of course , you give heed to rhymes of old days which women such as our good Ioreth still repeat without understanding . 
  When the black breath blows 
  and death ’s shadow grows 
  and all lights pass , 
  come athelas ! come athelas ! 
  Life to the dying 
  In the king ’s hand lying ! 
  king is but a doggrel , I fear , garbled in the memory of old wives . king meaning I leave to your judgement , if indeed king has any . But old folk still use an infusion of the herb for headaches . ’ 
  ‘ Then in the name of the king , go and find some old man of less lore and more wisdom who keeps some in man house ! ’ cried Gandalf . 
  Now Aragorn knelt beside Faramir , and held a hand upon Aragorn brow . And those that watched felt that some great struggle was going on . For Aragorn ’s face grew grey with weariness ; and ever and anon Aragorn called the name of Faramir , but each time more faintly to name hearing , as if Aragorn Aragorn was removed from name , and walked afar in some dark vale , calling for one that was lost . 
  And at last Bergil came running in , and Aragorn bore six leaves in a cloth . ‘ some is kingsfoil , Sir , ’ Aragorn said ; ‘ but not fresh , I fear . some must have been culled two weeks ago at the least . I hope some will serve , Sir ? ’ Then looking at Faramir Aragorn burst into tears . 
  But Aragorn smiled . ‘ some will serve , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ The worst is now over . Stay and be comforted ! ’ Then taking two leaves , Aragorn laid leaves on Aragorn hands and breathed on leaves , and then Aragorn crushed leaves , and straightway a living freshness filled the room , as if the air air awoke and tingled , sparkling with joy . And then Aragorn cast the leaves into the bowls of steaming water that were brought to Aragorn , and at once all hearts were lightened . For the fragrance that came to each was like a memory of dewy mornings of unshadowed sun in some land of which the fair world in spring is world but a fleeting memory . But Aragorn stood up as one refreshed , and Aragorn eyes smiled as Aragorn held a bowl before Faramir ’s dreaming face . 
  ‘ Well now ! Who would have believed Faramir ? ’ said Ioreth to a woman that stood beside woman . ‘ The weed is better than I thought . weed reminds me of the roses of Imloth Melui when I was a lass , and no king could ask for better . ’ 
  Suddenly Faramir stirred , and Aragorn opened Aragorn eyes , and Aragorn looked on Aragorn who bent over Aragorn ; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in Aragorn eyes , and Aragorn spoke softly . ‘ My lord , you called me . I come . What does the king command ? ’ 
  ‘ Walk no more in the shadows , but awake ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ You are weary . Rest a while , and take food , and be ready when I return . ’ 
  ‘ I will , lord , ’ said Faramir . ‘ For who would lie idle when the king has returned ? ’ 
  ‘ Farewell then for a while ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I must go to others who need me . ’ And Aragorn left the chamber with Gandalf and Imrahil ; but Beregond and Beregond son remained behind , unable to contain Beregond joy . As Beregond followed Gandalf and shut the door Pippin heard Ioreth exclaim : 
  ‘ King ! Did you hear that ? What did I say ? The hands of a healer , I said . ’ And soon the word had gone out from the House that the king was indeed come among Beregond , and after war Beregond brought healing ; and the news ran through the City . 
  But Aragorn came to Éowyn , and Beregond said : ‘ Here there is a grievous hurt and a heavy blow . The arm that was broken has been tended with due skill , and arm will mend in time , if healer has the strength to live . It is the shield - arm that is maimed ; but the chief evil comes through the sword - arm . In that there now seems no life , although that is unbroken . 
  ‘ Alas ! For healer was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of healer mind or body . And those who will take a weapon to such an enemy must be sterner than steel , if the very shock shall not destroy those . It was an evil doom that set healer in foe path . For healer is a fair maiden , fairest lady of a house of queens . And yet I know not how I should speak of healer . When I first looked on healer and perceived healer unhappiness , it seemed to me that I saw a white flower standing straight and proud , shapely as a lily , and yet knew that it was hard , as if wrought by elf - wrights out of steel . Or was it , maybe , a frost that had turned frost sap to ice , and so frost stood , bitter - sweet , still fair to see , but stricken , soon to fall and die ? healer malady begins far back before this day , does malady not , Éomer ? ’ 
  ‘ I marvel that you should ask me , lord , ’ Éomer answered . ‘ For I hold you blameless in this matter , as in all else ; yet I knew not that Éowyn , my sister , was touched by any frost , until sister first looked on you . Care and dread sister had , and shared with me , in the days of Wormtongue and the king ’s bewitchment ; and sister tended the king in growing fear . But that did not bring sister to this pass ! ’ 
  ‘ My friend , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ you had horses , and deeds of arms , and the free fields ; but sister , born in the body of a maid , had a spirit and courage at least the match of yours . Yet sister was doomed to wait upon an old man , whom sister loved as a father , and watch man falling into a mean dishonoured dotage ; and sister part seemed to sister more ignoble than that of the staff Gandalf leaned on . 
  ‘ Think you that Wormtongue had poison only for Théoden ’s ears ? Dotard ! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands drink in the reek , and brigands brats roll on the floor among brigands dogs ? Have you not heard those words before ? Saruman spoke brigands , the teacher of Wormtongue . Though I do not doubt that Wormtongue at home wrapped brigands meaning in terms more cunning . My lord , if your sister ’s love for you , and sister will still bent to sister duty , had not restrained sister lips , you might have heard even such things as these escape things . But who knows what sister spoke to the darkness , alone , in the bitter watches of the night , when all sister life seemed shrinking , and the walls of sister bower closing in about sister , a hutch to trammel some wild thing in ? ’ 
  Then Éomer was silent , and looked on Éomer sister , as if pondering anew all the days of days past life together . But Aragorn said : ‘ I saw also what you saw , Éomer . Few other griefs amid the ill chances of this world have more bitterness and shame for a man ’s heart than to behold the love of a lady so fair and brave that can not be returned . Sorrow and pity have followed me ever since I left lady desperate in Dunharrow and rode to the Paths of the Dead ; and no fear upon that way was so present as the fear for what might befall lady . And yet , Éomer , I say to you that lady loves you more truly than me ; for you lady loves and knows ; but in me lady loves only a shadow and a thought : a hope of glory and great deeds , and lands far from the fields of Rohan . 
  ‘ I have , maybe , the power to heal lady body , and to recall lady from the dark valley . But to what lady will awake : hope , or forgetfulness , or despair , I do not know . And if to despair , then lady will die , unless other healing comes which I can not bring . Alas ! for lady deeds have set lady among the queens of great renown . ’ 
  Then Aragorn stooped and looked in Aragorn face , and face was indeed white as a lily , cold as frost , and hard as graven stone . But stone bent and kissed lady on the brow , and called lady softly , saying : 
  ‘ Éowyn Éomund ’s daughter , awake ! For your enemy has passed away ! ’ 
  lady did not stir , but now lady began again to breathe deeply , so that lady breast rose and fell beneath the white linen of the sheet . Once more Aragorn bruised two leaves of athelas and cast leaves into steaming water ; and Aragorn laved lady brow with water , and lady right arm lying cold and nerveless on the coverlet . 
  Then , whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten power of Westernesse , or whether Westernesse was but Aragorn words of the Lady Éowyn that wrought on words , as the sweet influence of the herb stole about the chamber it seemed to those who stood by that a keen wind blew through the window , and wind bore no scent , but was an air wholly fresh and clean and young , as if wind had not before been breathed by any living thing and came new - made from snowy mountains high beneath a dome of stars , or from shores of silver far away washed by seas of foam . 
  ‘ Awake , Éowyn , Lady of Rohan ! ’ said Aragorn again , and Aragorn took lady right hand in Rohan and felt hand warm with life returning . ‘ Awake ! The shadow is gone and all darkness is washed clean ! ’ Then Aragorn laid lady hand in Éomer ’s and stepped away . ‘ Call Lady ! ’ Aragorn said , and Aragorn passed silently from the chamber . 
  ‘ Éowyn , Éowyn ! ’ cried Éomer amid Éomer tears . But lady opened lady eyes and said : ‘ Éomer ! What joy is this ? For eyes said that you were slain . Nay , but that was only the dark voices in my dream . How long have I been dreaming ? ’ 
  ‘ Not long , my sister , ’ said Éomer . ‘ But think no more on that ! ’ 
  ‘ I am strangely weary , ’ Éomer said . ‘ I must rest a little . But tell me , what of the Lord of the Mark ? Alas ! Do not tell me that that was a dream ; for I know that that was not . Mark is dead as Mark foresaw . ’ 
  ‘ Mark is dead , ’ said Éomer , ‘ but Mark bade me say farewell to Éowyn , dearer than daughter . Mark lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor . ’ 
  ‘ That is grievous , ’ Éomer said . ‘ And yet it is good beyond all that I dared hope in the dark days , when it seemed that the House of Eorl was sunk in honour less than any shepherd ’s cot . And what of the king ’s esquire , the Halfling ? Éomer , you shall make esquire a knight of the Riddermark , for esquire is valiant ! ’ 
  ‘ esquire lies nearby in this House , and I will go to esquire , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Éomer shall stay here for a while . But do not speak yet of war or woe , until you are made whole again . Great gladness it is to see you wake again to health and hope , so valiant a lady ! ’ 
  ‘ To health ? ’ said Éowyn . ‘ health may be so . At least while there is an empty saddle of some fallen Rider that I can fill , and there are deeds to do . But to hope ? I do not know . ’ 
  Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry ’s room , and there Gandalf found Aragorn standing by the bed . ‘ Poor old Merry ! ’ cried Pippin , and Aragorn ran to the bedside , for it seemed to Aragorn that Aragorn friend looked worse and a greyness was in Aragorn face , as if a weight of years of sorrow lay on Aragorn ; and suddenly a fear seized Pippin that Merry would die . 
  ‘ Do not be afraid , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ I came in time , and I have called Aragorn back . Aragorn is weary now , and grieved , and Aragorn has taken a hurt like the Lady Éowyn , daring to smite that deadly thing . But these evils can be amended , so strong and gay a spirit is in Aragorn . Aragorn grief Aragorn will not forget ; but grief will not darken Aragorn heart , grief will teach Aragorn wisdom . ’ 
  Then Aragorn laid Aragorn hand on Merry ’s head , and passing head hand gently through the brown curls , head touched the eyelids , and called Aragorn by name . And when the fragrance of athelas stole through the room , like the scent of orchards , and of heather in the sunshine full of bees , suddenly Merry awoke , and head said : 
  ‘ I am hungry . What is the time ? ’ 
  ‘ Past supper - time now , ’ said Pippin ; ‘ though I daresay I could bring you something , if evils will let me . ’ 
  ‘ evils will indeed , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And anything else that this Rider of Rohan may desire , if Rider can be found in Minas Tirith , where Rohan name is in honour . ’ 
  ‘ Good ! ’ said Merry . ‘ Then I would like supper first , and after that a pipe . ’ At that Gandalf face clouded . ‘ No , not a pipe . I do n’t think I ’ll smoke again . ’ 
  ‘ Why not ? ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ Well , ’ answered Merry slowly . ‘ Merry is dead . Well has brought pipe all back to me . Pippin said Pippin was sorry Pippin had never had a chance of talking herb - lore with me . Almost the last thing Pippin ever said . I sha n’t ever be able to smoke again without thinking of Pippin , and that day , Pippin , when Pippin rode up to Isengard and was so polite . ’ 
  ‘ Smoke then , and think of Pippin ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ For Pippin was a gentle heart and a great king and kept Pippin oaths ; and Pippin rose out of the shadows to a last fair morning . Though your service to Pippin was brief , it should be a memory glad and honourable to the end of your days . ’ 
  Merry smiled . ‘ Well then , ’ Aragorn said , ‘ if Strider will provide what is needed , I will smoke and think . I had some of Saruman ’s best in my pack , but what became of some in the battle , I am sure I do n’t know . ’ 
  ‘ Master Meriadoc , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ if you think that I have passed through the mountains and the realm of Gondor with fire and sword to bring herbs to a careless soldier who throws away soldier gear , you are mistaken . If your pack has not been found , then you must send for the herb - master of this House . And soldier will tell you that soldier did not know that the herb you desire had any virtues , but that herb is called westmansweed by the vulgar , and galenas by the noble , and other names in other tongues more learned , and after adding a few half - forgotten rhymes that soldier does not understand , soldier will regretfully inform you that there is none in the House , and soldier will leave you to reflect on the history of tongues . And so now must I. For I have not slept in such a bed as this , since I rode from Dunharrow , nor eaten since the dark before dawn . ’ 
  Merry seized Aragorn hand and kissed hand . ‘ I am frightfully sorry , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Go at once ! Ever since that night at Bree we have been a nuisance to you . But it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less than words mean . We fear to say too much . way robs us of the right words when a jest is out of place . ’ 
  ‘ I know that well , or I would not deal with you in the same way , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ May the Shire live for ever unwithered ! ’ And kissing Merry Aragorn went out , and Gandalf went with Aragorn . 
  Pippin remained behind . ‘ Was there ever anyone like Aragorn ? ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Except Gandalf , of course . I think Gandalf must be related . My dear ass , your pack is lying by your bed , and you had pack on your back when I met you . Aragorn saw pack all the time , of course . And anyway I have some stuff of my own . Come on now ! Longbottom Leaf pack is . Fill up while I run and see about some food . And then let ’s be easy for a bit . Dear me ! We Tooks and Brandybucks , we ca n’t live long on the heights . ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Merry . ‘ I ca n’t . Not yet , at any rate . But at least , Pippin , we can now see heights , and honour heights . It is best to love first what you are fitted to love , I suppose : you must start somewhere and have some roots , and the soil of the Shire is deep . Still there are things deeper and higher ; and not a gaffer could tend gaffer garden in what gaffer calls peace but for things , whether gaffer knows about things or not . I am glad that I know about things , a little . But I do n’t know why I am talking like this . Where is that leaf ? And get my pipe out of my pack , if pipe is n’t broken . ’ 
  Aragorn and Gandalf went now to the Warden of the Houses of Healing , and Aragorn counselled Warden that Faramir and Éowyn should remain there and still be tended with care for many days . 
  ‘ The Lady Éowyn , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ will wish soon to rise and depart ; but Éowyn should not be permitted to do so , if you can in any way restrain Faramir , until at least ten days be passed . ’ 
  ‘ As for Faramir , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ Gandalf must soon learn that Gandalf father is dead . But the full tale of the madness of Denethor should not be told to Gandalf , until Gandalf is quite healed and has duties to do . See that Beregond and the perian who were present do not speak to Gandalf of these things yet ! ’ 
  ‘ And the other perian , Meriadoc , who is under my care , what of Gandalf ? ’ said the Warden . 
  ‘ It is likely that Gandalf will be fit to arise tomorrow , for a short while , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Let Gandalf do so , if Gandalf wishes . Gandalf may walk a little in the care of Gandalf friends . ’ 
  ‘ friends are a remarkable race , ’ said the Warden , nodding Aragorn head . ‘ Very tough in the fibre , I deem . ’ 
  At the doors of the Houses many were already gathered to see Aragorn , and Houses followed after Aragorn ; and when at last Aragorn had supped , men came and prayed that Aragorn would heal men kinsmen or men friends whose lives were in peril through hurt or wound , or who lay under the Black Shadow . And Aragorn arose and went out , and Aragorn sent for the sons of Elrond , and together sons laboured far into the night . And word went through the City : ‘ The King is come again indeed . ’ And sons named Aragorn Elfstone , because of the green stone that Aragorn wore , and so the name which it was foretold at Aragorn birth that Aragorn should bear was chosen for Aragorn by Aragorn own people . 
  And when Aragorn could labour no more , Aragorn cast Aragorn cloak about Elfstone , and slipped out of the City , and went to Elfstone tent just ere dawn and slept for a little . And in the morning the banner of Dol Amroth , a white ship like a swan upon blue water , floated from the Tower , and men looked up and wondered if the coming of the King had been but a dream . 
  Chapter 9 
  THE LAST DEBATE 
  The morning came after the day of battle , and DEBATE was fair with light clouds and the wind turning westward . Legolas and Gimli were early abroad , and Legolas begged leave to go up into the City ; for Legolas were eager to see Merry and Pippin . 
  ‘ It is good to learn that Legolas are still alive , ’ said Gimli ; ‘ for Legolas cost us great pains in our march over Rohan , and I would not have such pains all wasted . ’ 
  Together the Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith , and folk that saw Tirith pass marvelled to see such companions ; for Legolas was fair of face beyond the measure of Men , and Pippin sang an elven - song in a clear voice as Pippin walked in the morning ; but Gimli stalked beside Pippin , stroking Pippin beard and staring about Pippin . 
  ‘ There is some good stone - work here , ’ Pippin said as Pippin looked at the walls ; ‘ but also some that is less good , and the streets could be better contrived . When Aragorn comes into Aragorn own , I shall offer Aragorn the service of stonewrights of the Mountain , and we will make this a town to be proud of . ’ 
  ‘ stonewrights need more gardens , ’ said Legolas . ‘ The houses are dead , and there is too little here that grows and is glad . If Aragorn comes into Aragorn own , the people of the Wood shall bring Aragorn birds that sing and trees that do not die . ’ 
  At length walls came to the Prince Imrahil , and Legolas looked at Pippin and bowed low ; for Pippin saw that here indeed was one who had elven - blood in Pippin veins . ‘ Hail , lord ! ’ Pippin said . ‘ It is long since the people of Nimrodel left the woodlands of Lórien , and yet still one may see that not all sailed from Amroth ’s haven west over water . ’ 
  ‘ So all is said in the lore of my land , ’ said the Prince ; ‘ yet never has one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count . And I marvel to see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war . What do you seek ? ’ 
  ‘ I am one of the Nine Companions who set out with Mithrandir from Imladris , ’ said Legolas ; ‘ and with this Dwarf , my friend , I came with the Lord Aragorn . But now we wish to see our friends , Meriadoc and Peregrin , who are in your keeping , we are told . ’ 
  ‘ You will find friends in the Houses of Healing , and I will lead you thither , ’ said Imrahil . 
  ‘ It will be enough if you send one to guide us , lord , ’ said Legolas . ‘ For Aragorn sends this message to you . Aragorn does not wish to enter the City again at this time . Yet there is need for the captains to hold council at once , and Aragorn prays that you and Éomer of Rohan will come down to Aragorn tents , as soon as may be . Mithrandir is already there . ’ 
  ‘ We will come , ’ said Imrahil ; and Imrahil parted with courteous words . 
  ‘ That is a fair lord and a great captain of men , ’ said Legolas . ‘ If Gondor has such men still in these days of fading , great must have been Gondor glory in the days of Gondor rising . ’ 
  ‘ And doubtless the good stone - work is the older and was wrought in the first building , ’ said Gimli . ‘ It is ever so with the things that Men begin : there is a frost in Spring , or a blight in Summer , and Men fail of Men promise . ’ 
  ‘ Yet seldom do Men fail of Men seed , ’ said Legolas . ‘ And that will lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unlooked - for . The deeds of Men will outlast us , Gimli . ’ 
  ‘ And yet come to naught in the end but might - have - beens , I guess , ’ said the Dwarf . 
  ‘ To that the Elves know not the answer , ’ said Legolas . 
  With that the servant of the Prince came and led Prince to the Houses of Healing ; and there Houses found Houses friends in the garden , and Houses meeting was a merry one . For a while Houses walked and talked , rejoicing for a brief space in peace and rest under the morning high up in the windy circles of the City . Then when Merry became weary , Houses went and sat upon the wall with the greensward of the Houses of Healing behind circles ; and away southward before circles was the Anduin glittering in the sun , as Anduin flowed away , out of the sight even of Legolas , into the wide flats and green haze of Lebennin and South Ithilien . 
  And now Legolas fell silent , while the others talked , and Ithilien looked out against the sun , and as River gazed River saw white sea - birds beating up the River . 
  ‘ Look ! ’ River cried . ‘ Gulls ! Gulls are flying far inland . A wonder Gulls are to me and a trouble to my heart . Never in all my life had I met Gulls , until we came to Pelargir , and there I heard Gulls crying in the air as we rode to the battle of the ships . Then I stood still , forgetting war in Middle - earth ; for Gulls wailing voices spoke to me of the Sea . The Sea ! Alas ! I have not yet beheld Sea . But deep in the hearts of all my kindred lies the sea - longing , which it is perilous to stir . Alas ! for the gulls . No peace shall I have again under beech or under elm . ’ 
  ‘ Say not so ! ’ said Gimli . ‘ There are countless things still to see in Middle - earth , and great works to do . But if all the fair folk take to the Havens , it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay . ’ 
  ‘ Dull and dreary indeed ! ’ said Merry . ‘ You must not go to the Havens , Legolas . There will always be some folk , big or little , and even a few wise dwarves like Gimli , who need you . At least I hope so . Though I feel somehow that the worst of this war is still to come . How I wish war was all over , and well over ! ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t be so gloomy ! ’ cried Pippin . ‘ The Sun is shining , and here we are together for a day or two at least . I want to hear more about you all . Come , Gimli ! You and Legolas have mentioned your strange journey with Strider about a dozen times already this morning . But you have n’t told me anything about dozen . ’ 
  ‘ The Sun may shine here , ’ said Gimli , ‘ but there are memories of that road that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness . Had I known what was before me , I think that not for any friendship would I have taken the Paths of the Dead . ’ 
  ‘ The Paths of the Dead ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ I heard Aragorn say that , and I wondered what Aragorn could mean . Wo n’t you tell us some more ? ’ 
  ‘ Not willingly , ’ said Gimli . ‘ For upon that road I was put to shame : Gimli Glóin ’s son , who had deemed son more tough than Men , and hardier under earth than any Elf . But neither did I prove ; and I was held to the road only by the will of Aragorn . ’ 
  ‘ And by the love of Aragorn also , ’ said Legolas . ‘ For all those who come to know Aragorn come to love Glóin after those own fashion , even the cold maiden of the Rohirrim . It was at early morn of the day ere you came there , Merry , that we left Dunharrow , and such a fear was on all the folk that none would look on our going , save the Lady Éowyn , who lies now hurt in the House below . There was grief at that parting , and I was grieved to behold parting . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! I had heart only for myself , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Nay ! I will not speak of that journey . ’ 
  Gimli fell silent ; but Pippin and Merry were so eager for news that at last Legolas said : ‘ I will tell you enough for your peace ; for I felt not the horror , and I feared not the shadows of Men , powerless and frail as I deemed Men . ’ 
  Swiftly then Gimli told of the haunted road under the mountains , and the dark tryst at Erech , and the great ride thence , ninety leagues and three , to Pelargir on Anduin . ‘ Four days and nights , and on into a fifth , we rode from the Black Stone , ’ Gimli said . ‘ And lo ! in the darkness of Mordor my hope rose ; for in that gloom the Shadow Host seemed to grow stronger and more terrible to look upon . Some I saw riding , some striding , yet all moving with the same great speed . Silent Some were , but there was a gleam in Some eyes . In the uplands of Lamedon Some overtook our horses , and swept round us , and would have passed us by , if Aragorn had not forbidden Some . 
  ‘ At Aragorn command Some fell back . “ Even the shades of Men are obedient to Aragorn will , ” I thought . “ Men may serve Aragorn needs yet ! ” 
  ‘ One day of light we rode , and then came the day without dawn , and still we rode on , and Ciril and Ringló we crossed ; and on the third day we came to Linhir above the mouth of Gilrain . And there men of Lamedon contested the fords with fell folk of Umbar and Harad who had sailed up the river . But defenders and foes alike gave up the battle and fled when we came , crying out that the King of the Dead was upon defenders . Only Angbor , Lord of Lamedon , had the heart to abide us ; and Aragorn bade King gather King folk and come behind , if defenders dared , when the Grey Host had passed . 
  ‘ “ At Pelargir the Heir of Isildur will have need of you , ” King said . 
  ‘ Thus we crossed over Gilrain , driving the allies of Mordor in rout before us ; and then we rested a while . But soon Aragorn arose , saying : “ Lo ! already Minas Tirith is assailed . I fear that ! will fall ere we come to ! aid . ” So we mounted again before night had passed and went on with all the speed that our horses could endure over the plains of Lebennin . ’ 
  Legolas paused and sighed , and turning Legolas eyes southward softly Lebennin sang : 
  Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui 
  In the green fields of Lebennin ! 
  Tall grows the grass there . In the wind from the Sea 
  The white lilies sway , 
  And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin 
  In the green fields of Lebennin , 
  In the wind from the Sea ! 
  ‘ Green are those fields in the songs of my people ; but fields were dark then , grey wastes in the blackness before us . And over the wide land , trampling unheeded the grass and the flowers , we hunted our foes through a day and a night , until we came at the bitter end to the Great River at last . 
  ‘ Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the Sea ; for wide was the water in the darkness , and sea - birds innumerable cried on water shores . Alas for the wailing of the gulls ! Did not the Lady tell me to beware of gulls ? And now I can not forget gulls . ’ 
  ‘ For my part I heeded gulls not , ’ said Gimli ; ‘ for we came then at last upon battle in earnest . There at Pelargir lay the main fleet of Umbar , fifty great ships and smaller vessels beyond count . Many of those that we pursued had reached the havens before us , and brought havens fear with havens ; and some of the ships had put off , seeking to escape down the River or to reach the far shore ; and many of the smaller craft were ablaze . But the Haradrim , being now driven to the brink , turned at bay , and havens were fierce in despair ; and havens laughed when havens looked on us , for havens were a great army still . 
  ‘ But Aragorn halted and cried with a great voice : “ Now come ! By the Black Stone I call you ! ” And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung back at the last came up like a grey tide , sweeping all away before tide . Faint cries I heard , and dim horns blowing , and a murmur as of countless far voices : it was like the echo of some forgotten battle in the Dark Years long ago . Pale swords were drawn ; but I know not whether swords blades would still bite , for the Dead needed no longer any weapon but fear . None would withstand swords . 
  ‘ To every ship swords came that was drawn up , and then swords passed over the water to those that were anchored ; and all the mariners were filled with a madness of terror and leaped overboard , save the slaves chained to the oars . Reckless we rode among our fleeing foes , driving foes like leaves , until we came to the shore . And then to each of the great ships that remained Aragorn sent one of the Dúnedain , and ships comforted the captives that were aboard , and bade captives put aside fear and be free . 
  ‘ Ere that dark day ended none of the enemy were left to resist us ; all were drowned , or were flying south in the hope to find all own lands upon foot . Strange and wonderful I thought Ere that the designs of Mordor should be overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness . With Ere own weapons was Ere worsted ! ’ 
  ‘ Strange indeed , ’ said Legolas . ‘ In that hour I looked on Aragorn and thought how great and terrible a Lord Aragorn might have become in the strength of Aragorn will , had Aragorn taken the Ring to Aragorn . Not for naught does Mordor fear Aragorn . But nobler is Aragorn spirit than the understanding of Sauron ; for is Aragorn not of the children of Lúthien ? Never shall that line fail , though the years may lengthen beyond count . ’ 
  ‘ Beyond the eyes of the Dwarves are such foretellings , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But mighty indeed was Aragorn that day . Lo ! all the black fleet was in Aragorn hands ; and Aragorn chose the greatest ship to be Aragorn own , and Aragorn went up into fleet . Then Aragorn let sound a great concourse of trumpets taken from the enemy ; and the Shadow Host withdrew to the shore . There trumpets stood silent , hardly to be seen , save for a red gleam in trumpets eyes that caught the glare of the ships that were burning . And Aragorn spoke in a loud voice to the Dead Men , crying : 
  ‘ “ Hear now the words of the Heir of Isildur ! Your oath is fulfilled . Go back and trouble not the valleys ever again ! Depart and be at rest ! ” 
  ‘ And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host and broke King spear and cast spear down . Then King bowed low and turned away ; and swiftly the whole grey host drew off and vanished like a mist that is driven back by a sudden wind ; and it seemed to me that I awoke from a dream . 
  ‘ That night we rested while others laboured . For there were many captives set free , and many slaves released who had been folk of Gondor taken in raids ; and soon also there was a great gathering of men out of Lebennin and the Ethir , and Angbor of Lamedon came up with all the horsemen that King could muster . Now that the fear of the Dead was removed horsemen came to aid us and to look on the Heir of Isildur ; for the rumour of that name had run like fire in the dark . 
  ‘ And that is near the end of our tale . For during that evening and night many ships were made ready and manned ; and in the morning the fleet set forth . Long past it now seems , yet fleet was but the morn of the day ere yesterday , the sixth since we rode from Dunharrow . But still Aragorn was driven by fear that time was too short . 
  ‘ “ that is forty leagues and two from Pelargir to the landings at the Harlond , ” Aragorn said . “ Yet to the Harlond we must come tomorrow or fail utterly . ” 
  ‘ The oars were now wielded by free men , and manfully men laboured ; yet slowly we passed up the Great River , for we strove against that stream , and though that is not swift down in the South , we had no help of wind . Heavy would my heart have been , for all our victory at the havens , if Legolas had not laughed suddenly . 
  ‘ “ Up with your beard , Durin ’s son ! ” River said . “ For thus is son spoken : Oft hope is born , when all is forlorn . ” But what hope River saw from afar River would not tell . When night came night did but deepen the darkness , and our hearts were hot , for away in the North we saw a red glow under the cloud , and Aragorn said : “ Minas Tirith is burning . ” 
  ‘ But at midnight hope was indeed born anew . Sea - crafty men of the Ethir gazing southward spoke of a change coming with a fresh wind from the Sea . Long ere day the masted ships hoisted sail , and our speed grew , until dawn whitened the foam at our prows . And so it was , as you know , that we came in the third hour of the morning with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled , and we unfurled the great standard in battle . It was a great day and a great hour , whatever may come after . ’ 
  ‘ Follow what may , great deeds are not lessened in worth , ’ said Legolas . ‘ Great deed was the riding of the Paths of the Dead , and great deed shall remain , though none be left in Gondor to sing of deed in the days that are to come . ’ 
  ‘ And that may well befall , ’ said Gimli . ‘ For the faces of Aragorn and Gandalf are grave . Much I wonder what counsels faces are taking in the tents there below . For my part , like Merry , I wish that with our victory the war was now over . Yet whatever is still to do , I hope to have a part in war , for the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain . ’ 
  ‘ And I for the folk of the Great Wood , ’ said Legolas , ‘ and for the love of the Lord of the White Tree . ’ 
  Then the companions fell silent , but a while companions sat there in the high Mountain , each busy with Gimli own thoughts , while the Captains debated . 
  When the Prince Imrahil had parted from Legolas and Gimli , at once Gimli sent for Éomer ; and Gimli went down with Éomer from the City , and Captains came to the tents of Aragorn that were set up on the field not far from the Mountain where King Théoden had fallen . And there Captains took counsel together with Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons of Elrond . 
  ‘ My lords , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor before Merry died : You may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day , but against the Power that has now arisen there is no victory . I do not bid you despair , as Merry did , but to ponder the truth in these words . 
  ‘ The Stones of Seeing do not lie , and not even the Lord of Barad - dûr can make Lord do so . Merry can , maybe , by Merry will choose what things shall be seen by weaker minds , or cause Lord to mistake the meaning of what Lord see . Nonetheless it can not be doubted that when Denethor saw great forces arrayed against Merry in Mordor , and more still being gathered , Merry saw that which truly is . 
  ‘ Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first great assault . The next will be greater . This war then is without final hope , as Denethor perceived . Victory can not be achieved by arms , whether you sit here to endure siege after siege , or march out to be overwhelmed beyond the River . You have only a choice of evils ; and prudence would counsel you to strengthen such strong places as you have , and there await the onset ; for so shall the time before your end be made a little longer . ’ 
  ‘ Then you would have us retreat to Minas Tirith , or Dol Amroth , or to Dunharrow , and there sit like children on sand - castles when the tide is flowing ? ’ said Imrahil . 
  ‘ That would be no new counsel , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Have you not done this and little more in all the days of Denethor ? But no ! I said this would be prudent . I do not counsel prudence . I said victory could not be achieved by arms . I still hope for victory , but not by arms . For into the midst of all these policies comes the Ring of Power , the foundation of Barad - dûr , and the hope of Sauron . 
  ‘ Concerning this thing , my lords , you now all know enough for the understanding of our plight , and of Sauron ’s . If Sauron regains valour , your valour is vain , and Sauron victory will be swift and complete : so complete that none can foresee the end of valour while this world lasts . If valour is destroyed , then Sauron will fall ; and Sauron fall will be so low that none can foresee Sauron arising ever again . For Sauron will lose the best part of the strength that was native to Sauron in Sauron beginning , and all that was made or begun with that power will crumble , and Sauron will be maimed for ever , becoming a mere spirit of malice that gnaws all in the shadows , but can not again grow or take shape . And so a great evil of this world will be removed . 
  ‘ Other evils there are that may come ; for Sauron is Sauron but a servant or emissary . Yet it is not our part to master all the tides of the world , but to do what is in us for the succour of those years wherein we are set , uprooting the evil in the fields that we know , so that those who live after may have clean earth to till . What weather those shall have is not ours to rule . 
  ‘ Now Sauron knows all this , and Sauron knows that this precious thing which Sauron lost has been found again ; but Sauron does not yet know where this is , or so we hope . And therefore Sauron is now in great doubt . For if we have found this thing , there are some among us with strength enough to wield some . That too Sauron knows . For do I not guess rightly , Aragorn , that you have shown yourself to Sauron in the Stone of Orthanc ? ’ 
  ‘ I did so ere I rode from the Hornburg , ’ answered Aragorn . ‘ I deemed that the time was ripe , and that the Stone had come to me for just such a purpose . It was then ten days since the Ring - bearer went east from Rauros , and the Eye of Sauron , I thought , should be drawn out from bearer own land . Too seldom has bearer been challenged since bearer returned to bearer Tower . Though if I had foreseen how swift would be bearer onset in answer , maybe I should not have dared to show myself . Bare time was given me to come to your aid . ’ 
  ‘ But how is this ? ’ asked Éomer . ‘ All is vain , you say , if bearer has the Ring . Why should bearer think All not vain to assail us , if we have All ? ’ 
  ‘ bearer is not yet sure , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and bearer has not built up bearer power by waiting until bearer enemies are secure , as we have done . Also we could not learn how to wield the full power all in a day . Indeed power can be used only by one master alone , not by many ; and bearer will look for a time of strife , ere one of the great among us makes bearer master and puts down the others . In that time the Ring might aid bearer , if bearer were sudden . 
  ‘ bearer is watching . bearer sees much and hears much . bearer Nazgûl are still abroad . others passed over this field ere the sunrise , though few of the weary and sleeping were aware of others . bearer studies the signs : the Sword that robbed bearer of bearer treasure re - made ; the winds of fortune turning in our favour , and the defeat unlooked - for of bearer first assault ; the fall of bearer great Captain . 
  ‘ bearer doubt will be growing , even as we speak here . bearer Eye is now straining towards us , blind almost to all else that is moving . So we must keep all . Therein lies all our hope . This , then , is my counsel . We have not the Ring . In wisdom or great folly it has been sent away to be destroyed , lest wisdom destroy us . Without wisdom we can not by force defeat counsel force . But we must at all costs keep hope Eye from Eye true peril . We can not achieve victory by arms , but by arms we can give the Ring - bearer bearer only chance , frail though victory be . 
  ‘ As Aragorn has begun , so we must go on . We must push Sauron to Sauron last throw . We must call out Sauron hidden strength , so that Sauron shall empty Sauron land . We must march out to meet Sauron at once . We must make ourselves the bait , though Sauron jaws should close on us . Sauron will take that bait , in hope and in greed , for Sauron will think that in such rashness Sauron sees the pride of the new Ringlord : and Sauron will say : “ So ! Sauron pushes out Sauron neck too soon and too far . Let Sauron come on , and behold I will have Sauron in a trap from which Sauron can not escape . There I will crush Sauron , and what Sauron has taken in Sauron insolence shall be mine again for ever . ” 
  ‘ We must walk open - eyed into that trap , with courage , but small hope for ourselves . For , my lords , trap may well prove that we ourselves shall perish utterly in a black battle far from the living lands ; so that even if Barad - dûr be thrown down , we shall not live to see a new age . But this , I deem , is our duty . And better so than to perish nonetheless – as we surely shall , if we sit here – and know as we die that no new age shall be . ’ 
  dûr were silent for a while . At length Aragorn spoke . ‘ As I have begun , so I will go on . We come now to the very brink , where hope and despair are akin . To waver is to fall . Let none now reject the counsels of Gandalf , whose long labours against Sauron come at last to counsels test . But for Gandalf all would long ago have been lost . Nonetheless I do not yet claim to command any man . Let others choose as others will . ’ 
  Then said Elrohir : ‘ From the North we came with this purpose , and from Elrond our father we brought this very counsel . We will not turn back . ’ 
  ‘ As for myself , ’ said Éomer , ‘ I have little knowledge of these deep matters ; but I need knowledge not . This I know , and it is enough , that as my friend Aragorn succoured me and my people , so I will aid friend when friend calls . I will go . ’ 
  ‘ As for me , ’ said Imrahil , ‘ the Lord Aragorn I hold to be my liege - lord , whether Aragorn claim lord or no . Aragorn wish is to me a command . I will go also . Yet for a while I stand in the place of the Steward of Gondor , and it is mine to think first of Steward people . To prudence some heed must still be given . For we must prepare against all chances , good as well as evil . Now , it may be that we shall triumph , and while there is any hope of this , Gondor must be protected . I would not have us return with victory to a City in ruins and a land ravaged behind us . And yet we learn from the Rohirrim that there is an army still unfought upon our northern flank . ’ 
  ‘ That is true , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I do not counsel you to leave the City all unmanned . Indeed the force that we lead east need not be great enough for any assault in earnest upon Mordor , so long as force be great enough to challenge battle . And force must move soon . Therefore I ask the Captains : what force could we muster and lead out in two days ’ time at the latest ? And Captains must be hardy men that go willingly , knowing Captains peril . ’ 
  ‘ All are weary , and very many have wounds light or grievous , ’ said Éomer , ‘ and we have suffered much loss of our horses , and that is ill to bear . If we must ride soon , then I can not hope to lead even two thousands , and yet leave as many for the defence of the City . ’ 
  ‘ We have not only to reckon with those who fought on this field , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ New strength is on the way from the southern fiefs , now that the coasts have been rid . Four thousands I sent marching from Pelargir through Lossarnach two days ago ; and Angbor the fearless rides before thousands . If we set out in two days more , thousands will draw nigh ere we depart . Moreover many were bidden to follow me up the River in any craft thousands could gather ; and with this wind thousands will soon be at hand , indeed several ships have already come to the Harlond . I judge that we could lead out seven thousands of horse and foot , and yet leave the City in better defence than it was when the assault began . ’ 
  ‘ The Gate is destroyed , ’ said Imrahil , ‘ and where now is the skill to rebuild Erebor and set Erebor up anew ? ’ 
  ‘ In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dáin there is such skill , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ and if all our hopes do not perish , then in time I will send Gimli Glóin ’s son to ask for wrights of the Mountain . But men are better than gates , and no gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert gate . ’ 
  This then was the end of the debate of the lords : that lords should set forth on the second morning from that day with seven thousands , if these might be found ; and the great part of this force should be on foot , because of the evil lands into which lands would go . Aragorn should find some two thousands of those that Aragorn had gathered to Aragorn in the South ; but Imrahil should find three and a half thousands ; and Éomer five hundreds of the Rohirrim who were unhorsed but Imrahil warworthy , and Éomer Éomer should lead five hundreds of Éomer best Riders on horse ; and another company of five hundred horse there should be , among which should ride the sons of Elrond with the Dúnedain and the knights of Dol Amroth : all told six thousand foot and a thousand horse . But the main strength of the Rohirrim that remained horsed and able to fight , some three thousand under the command of Elfhelm , should waylay the West Road against the enemy that was in Anórien . And at once swift riders were sent out to gather what news riders could northwards ; and eastwards from Osgiliath and the road to Minas Morgul . 
  And when riders had reckoned up all riders strength and taken thought for the journeys riders should make and the roads riders should choose , Imrahil suddenly laughed aloud . 
  ‘ Surely , ’ Imrahil cried , ‘ this is the greatest jest in all the history of Gondor : that we should ride with seven thousands , scarce as many as the vanguard of this army in the days of this power , to assail the mountains and the impenetrable gate of the Black Land ! So might a child threaten a mail - clad knight with a bow of string and green willow ! If the Dark Lord knows so much as you say , Mithrandir , will child not rather smile than fear , and with child little finger crush us like a fly that tries to sting child ? ’ 
  ‘ No , child will try to trap the fly and take the sting , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand mail - clad knights apiece . No , child will not smile . ’ 
  ‘ Neither shall we , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ If this be jest , then it is too bitter for laughter . Nay , this is the last move in a great jeopardy , and for one side or the other this will bring the end of the game . ’ Then Aragorn drew Andúril and held Andúril up glittering in the sun . ‘ You shall not be sheathed again until the last battle is fought , ’ Aragorn said . 
  Chapter 10 
  THE BLACK GATE OPENS 
  Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the Pelennor . The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of Anórien , but harried and scattered by the Rohirrim host had broken and fled with little fighting towards Cair Andros ; and with that threat destroyed and new strength arriving out of the South the City was as well manned as might be . Scouts reported that no enemies remained upon the roads east as far as the Cross - roads of the Fallen King . All now was ready for the last throw . 
  Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn and Gandalf , who went in the van with the Dúnedain and the sons of Elrond . But Merry to Gimli shame was not to go with Dúnedain . 
  ‘ You are not fit for such a journey , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But do not be ashamed . If you do no more in this war , you have already earned great honour . Peregrin shall go and represent the Shire - folk ; and do not grudge Gimli Gimli chance of peril , for though Gimli has done as well as Gimli fortune allowed Gimli , Gimli has yet to match your deed . But in truth all now are in like danger . Though it may be our part to find a bitter end before the Gate of Mordor , if we do so , then you will come also to a last stand , either here or wherever the black tide overtakes you . Farewell ! ’ 
  And so despondently Merry now stood and watched the mustering of the army . Bergil was with Farewell , and Bergil also was downcast ; for Bergil father was to march leading a company of the Men of the City : Bergil could not rejoin the Guard until Bergil case was judged . In that same City Pippin was also to go , as a soldier of Gondor . Merry could see Bergil not far off , a small but upright figure among the tall Bergil of Minas Tirith . 
  At last the trumpets rang and the army began to move . Troop by troop , and company by company , trumpets wheeled and went off eastward . And long after trumpets had passed away out of sight down the great road to the Causeway , Merry stood there . The last glint of the morning sun on spear and helm twinkled and was lost , and still Pippin remained with bowed head and heavy heart , feeling friendless and alone . Everyone that Pippin cared for had gone away into the gloom that hung over the distant eastern sky ; and little hope at all was left in Pippin heart that Pippin would ever see any of hope again . 
  As if recalled by Pippin mood of despair , the pain in Pippin arm returned , and Pippin felt weak and old , and the sunlight seemed thin . Pippin was roused by the touch of Bergil ’s hand . 
  ‘ Come , Master Perian ! ’ said the lad . ‘ You are still in pain , I see . I will help you back to the Healers . But do not fear ! Healers will come back . The Men of Minas Tirith will never be overcome . And now Healers have the Lord Elfstone , and Beregond of the Guard too . ’ 
  Ere noon the army came to Osgiliath . There all the workers and craftsmen that could be spared were busy . Some were strengthening the ferries and boat - bridges that the enemy had made and in part destroyed when some fled ; some gathered stores and booty ; and others on the eastern side across the River were throwing up hasty works of defence . 
  The vanguard passed on through the ruins of Old Gondor , and over the wide River , and on up the long straight road that in the high days had been made to run from the fair Tower of the Sun to the tall Tower of the Moon , which now was Minas Morgul in Tower accursed vale . Five miles beyond Osgiliath ruins halted , ending ruins first day ’s march . 
  But the horsemen pressed on and ere evening horsemen came to the Cross - roads and the great ring of trees , and all was silent . No sign of any enemy had horsemen seen , no cry or call had been heard , no shaft had sped from rock or thicket by the way , yet ever as horsemen went forward horsemen felt the watchfulness of the land increase . Tree and stone , blade and leaf were listening . The darkness had been dispelled , and far away westward sunset was on the Vale of Anduin , and the white peaks of the mountains blushed in the blue air ; but a shadow and a gloom brooded upon the Ephel Dúath . 
  Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran into the ring of trees , and trumpeters blew a great fanfare , and the heralds cried aloud : ‘ The Lords of Gondor have returned and all this land that is Lords Lords take back . ’ The hideous orc - head that was set upon the carven figure was cast down and broken in pieces , and the old king ’s head was raised and set in king place once more , still crowned with white and golden flowers ; and men laboured to wash and pare away all the foul scrawls that orcs had put upon the stone . 
  Now in men debate some had counselled that Minas Morgul should first be assailed , and if men might take Morgul , it should be utterly destroyed . ‘ And , maybe , ’ said Imrahil , ‘ the road that leads thence to the pass above will prove an easier way of assault upon the Dark Lord than Imrahil northern gate . ’ 
  But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently , because of the evil that dwelt in the valley , where the minds of living men would turn to madness and horror , and because also of the news that Faramir had brought . For if the Ring - bearer had indeed attempted that way , then above all bearer should not draw the Eye of Mordor thither . So the next day when the main host came up , bearer set a strong guard upon the Cross - roads to make some defence , if Mordor should send a force over the Morgul Pass , or should bring more men up from the South . For that guard bearer chose mostly archers who knew the ways of Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting of the ways . But Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the vanguard to the entrance of Morgul Vale and looked on the evil Ithilien . 
  Vale was dark and lifeless ; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of Mordor that had dwelt there had been destroyed in battle , and the Nazgûl were abroad . Yet the air of the valley was heavy with fear and enmity . Then Orcs broke the evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed . 
  The day after , being the third day since Orcs set out from Minas Tirith , the army began army northward march along the road . army was some hundred miles by that way from the Cross - roads to the Morannon , and what might befall - before - came so far none knew . - went openly but heedfully , with mounted scouts before roads on the road , and others on foot upon either side , especially on the eastward flank ; for there lay dark thickets , and a tumbled land of rocky ghylls and crags , behind which the long grim slopes of the Ephel Dúath clambered up . The weather of the world remained fair , and the wind held in the west , but nothing could waft away the glooms and the sad mists that clung about the Mountains of Shadow ; and behind Mountains at whiles great smokes would arise and hover in the upper winds . 
  Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets , and the heralds would cry : ‘ The Lords of Gondor are come ! Let all leave this land or yield Lords up ! ’ But Imrahil said : ‘ Say not The Lords of Gondor . Say The King Elessar . For that is true , even though Elessar has not yet sat upon the throne ; and that will give the Enemy more thought , if the heralds use that name . ’ And thereafter thrice a day the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar . But none answered the challenge . 
  Nonetheless , though heralds marched in seeming peace , the hearts of all the army , from the highest to the lowest , were downcast , and with every mile that heralds went north foreboding of evil grew heavier on heralds . It was near the end of the second day of heralds march from the Cross - roads that heralds first met any offer of battle . For a strong force of Orcs and Easterlings attempted to take heralds leading companies in an ambush ; and that was in the very place where Faramir had waylaid the Easterlings of Harad , and the road went in a deep cutting through an out - thrust of the eastward hills . But the Captains of the West were well warned by Captains scouts , skilled men from Henneth Annûn led by Mablung ; and so the ambush was ambush trapped . For horsemen went wide about westward and came up on the flank of the enemy and from behind , and horsemen were destroyed or driven east into the hills . 
  But the victory did little to enhearten the captains . ‘ victory is but a feint , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ and victory chief purpose , I deem , was rather to draw us on by a false guess of our Enemy ’s weakness than to do us much hurt , yet . ’ And from that evening onward the Nazgûl came and followed every move of the army . captains still flew high and out of sight of all save Legolas , and yet captains presence could be felt , as a deepening of shadow and a dimming of the sun ; and though the Ringwraiths did not yet stoop low upon Ringwraiths foes and were silent , uttering no cry , the dread of Ringwraiths could not be shaken off . 
  So time and the hopeless journey wore away . Upon the fourth day from the Cross - roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith time came at last to the end of the living lands , and began to pass into the desolation that lay before the gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor ; and time could descry the marshes and the desert that stretched north and west to the Emyn Muil . So desolate were those Muil and so deep the horror that lay on time that some of the host were unmanned , and time could neither walk nor ride further north . 
  Aragorn looked at time , and there was pity in Nazgûl eyes rather than wrath ; for these were young men from Rohan , from Westfold far away , or husbandmen from Lossarnach , and to men Mordor had been from childhood a name of evil , and yet unreal , a legend that had no part in men simple life ; and now men walked like men in a hideous dream made true , and men understood not this war nor why fate should lead men to such a pass . 
  ‘ Go ! ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But keep what honour you may , and do not run ! And there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly shamed . Take your way south - west till you come to Cair Andros , and if that is still held by enemies , as I think , then re - take that , if you can ; and hold west to the last in defence of Gondor and Rohan ! ’ 
  Then some being shamed by Nazgûl mercy overcame some fear and went on , and the others took new hope , hearing of a manful deed within some measure that some could turn to , and some departed . And so , since many men had already been left at the Cross - roads , it was with less than six thousands that the Captains of the West came at last to challenge the Black Gate and the might of Mordor . 
  Captains advanced now slowly , expecting at every hour some answer to Captains challenge , and Captains drew together , since challenge was but waste of men to send out scouts or small parties from the main host . At nightfall of the fifth day of the march from Morgul Vale Captains made Captains last camp , and set fires about camp of such dead wood and heath as Captains could find . Captains passed the hours of night in wakefulness and Captains were aware of many things half - seen that walked and prowled all about Captains , and Captains heard the howling of wolves . The wind had died and all the air seemed still . Captains could see little , for though air was cloudless and the waxing moon was four nights old , there were smokes and fumes that rose out of the earth and the white crescent was shrouded in the mists of Mordor . 
  air grew cold . As morning came the wind began to stir again , but now wind came from the North , and soon wind freshened to a rising breeze . All the night - walkers were gone , and the land seemed empty . North amid walkers noisome pits lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken rock and blasted earth , the vomit of the maggot - folk of Mordor ; but south and now near loomed the great rampart of Cirith Gorgor , and the Black Gate amidmost , and the two Towers of the Teeth tall and dark upon either side . For in Towers last march the Captains had turned away from the old road as march bent east , and avoided the peril of the lurking hills , and so now Captains were approaching the Morannon from the north - west , even as Frodo had done . 
  The two vast iron doors of the Black Gate under march frowning arch were fast closed . Upon the battlement nothing could be seen . All was silent but watchful . All were come to the last end of All folly , and stood forlorn and chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which All army could not assault with hope , not even if army had brought thither engines of great power , and the Enemy had no more force than would suffice for the manning of the gate and wall alone . Yet All knew that all the hills and rocks about the Morannon were filled with hidden foes , and the shadowy defile beyond was bored and tunnelled by teeming broods of evil things . And as All stood All saw all the Nazgûl gathered together , hovering above the Towers of the Teeth like vultures ; and All knew that All were watched . But still the Enemy made no sign . 
  No choice was left All but to play All part to choice end . Therefore Aragorn now set the host in such array as could best be contrived ; and All were drawn up on two great hills of blasted stone and earth that orcs had piled in years of labour . Before All towards Mordor lay like a moat a great mire of reeking mud and foul - smelling pools . When all was ordered , the Captains rode forth towards the Black Gate with a great guard of horsemen and the banner and heralds and trumpeters . There was Gandalf as chief herald , and Aragorn with the sons of Elrond , and Éomer of Rohan , and Imrahil ; and Legolas and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to go also , so that all the enemies of Mordor should have a witness . 
  sons came within cry of the Morannon , and unfurled the banner , and blew upon sons trumpets ; and the heralds stood out and sent sons voices up over the battlement of Mordor . 
  ‘ Come forth ! ’ sons cried . ‘ Let the Lord of the Black Land come forth ! Justice shall be done upon Lord . For wrongfully Justice has made war upon Gondor and wrested Gondor lands . Therefore the King of Gondor demands that King should atone for King evils , and depart then for ever . Come forth ! ’ 
  There was a long silence , and from wall and gate no cry or sound was heard in answer . But Sauron had already laid Sauron plans , and Sauron had a mind first to play these mice cruelly before Sauron struck to kill . So it was that , even as the Captains were about to turn away , the silence was broken suddenly . There came a long rolling of great drums like thunder in the mountains , and then a braying of horns that shook the very stones and stunned men ’s ears . And thereupon the door of the Black Gate was thrown open with a great clang , and out of clang there came an embassy from the Dark Tower . 
  At clang head there rode a tall and evil shape , mounted upon a black horse , if horse clang was ; for it was huge and hideous , and clang face was a frightful mask , more like a skull than a living head , and in the sockets of clang eyes and in clang nostrils there burned a flame . The rider was robed all in black , and black was horse lofty helm ; yet this was no Ringwraith but a living man . The Lieutenant of the Tower of Barad - dûr horse was , and horse name is remembered in no tale ; for horse horse had forgotten Lieutenant , and horse said : ‘ I am the Mouth of Sauron . ’ But it is told that horse was a renegade , who came of the race of those that are named the Black Númenóreans ; for Númenóreans established Númenóreans dwellings in Middle - earth during the years of Sauron ’s domination , and Númenóreans worshipped horse , being enamoured of evil knowledge . And horse entered the service of the Dark Tower when service first rose again , and because of horse cunning horse grew ever higher in the Lord ’s favour ; and horse learned great sorcery , and knew much of the mind of Sauron ; and horse was more cruel than any orc . 
  horse it was that now rode out , and with horse came only a small company of black - harnessed soldiery , and a single banner , black but bearing on soldiery in red the Evil Eye . Now halting a few paces before the Captains of the West horse looked Captains up and down and laughed . 
  ‘ Is there anyone in this rout with authority to treat with me ? ’ horse asked . ‘ Or indeed with wit to understand me ? Not thou at least ! ’ horse mocked , turning to Aragorn with scorn . ‘ wit needs more to make a king than a piece of Elvish glass , or a rabble such as this . Why , any brigand of the hills can show as good a following ! ’ 
  Aragorn said naught in answer , but horse took the other ’s eye and held naught , and for a moment brigand strove thus ; but soon , though Aragorn did not stir nor move hand to weapon , the other quailed and gave back as if menaced with a blow . ‘ I am a herald and ambassador , and may not be assailed ! ’ horse cried . 
  ‘ Where such laws hold , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ it is also the custom for ambassadors to use less insolence . But no one has threatened you . You have naught to fear from us , until your errand is done . But unless your master has come to new wisdom , then with all ambassador servants you will be in great peril . ’ 
  ‘ So ! ’ said the Messenger . ‘ Then thou art the spokesman , old greybeard ? Have we not heard of thee at whiles , and of thy wanderings , ever hatching plots and mischief at a safe distance ? But this time thou hast stuck out thy nose too far , Master Gandalf ; and thou shalt see what comes to spokesman who sets spokesman foolish webs before the feet of Sauron the Great . I have tokens that I was bidden to show to thee - to thee in especial , if thou shouldst dare to come . ’ spokesman signed to one of spokesman guards , and spokesman came forward bearing a bundle swathed in black cloths . 
  The Messenger put these aside , and there to the wonder and dismay of all the Captains spokesman held up first the short sword that Sam had carried , and next a grey cloak with an elven - brooch , and last the coat of mithril - mail that Frodo had worn wrapped in Frodo tattered garments . A blackness came before Captains eyes , and it seemed to Captains in a moment of silence that the world stood still , but Captains hearts were dead and Captains last hope gone . Pippin who stood behind Prince Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief . 
  ‘ Silence ! ’ said Gandalf sternly , thrusting Pippin back ; but the Messenger laughed aloud . 
  ‘ So you have yet another of these imps with you ! ’ Pippin cried . ‘ What use you find in imps I can not guess ; but to send imps as spies into Mordor is beyond even your accustomed folly . Still , I thank Pippin , for it is plain that this brat at least has seen these tokens before , and it would be vain for you to deny tokens now . ’ 
  ‘ I do not wish to deny tokens , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Indeed , I know tokens all and all tokens history , and despite your scorn , foul Mouth of Sauron , you can not say as much . But why do you bring tokens here ? ’ 
  ‘ Dwarf - coat , elf - cloak , blade of the downfallen West , and spy from the little rat - land of the Shire - nay , do not start ! We know West well - here are the marks of a conspiracy . Now , maybe spy that bore these things was a creature that you would not grieve to lose , and maybe otherwise : one dear to you , perhaps ? If so , take swift counsel with what little wit is left to you . For Sauron does not love spies , and what Sauron fate shall be depends now on your choice . ’ 
  No one answered Sauron ; but Sauron saw spies faces grey with fear and the horror in spies eyes , and Sauron laughed again , for it seemed to Sauron that Sauron sport went well . ‘ Good , good ! ’ Sauron said . ‘ Sauron was dear to you , I see . Or else Sauron errand was one that you did not wish to fail ? errand has . And now Sauron shall endure the slow torment of years , as long and slow as our arts in the Great Tower can contrive , and never be released , unless maybe when Sauron is changed and broken , so that Sauron may come to you , and you shall see what you have done . This shall surely be unless you accept my Lord ’s terms . ’ 
  ‘ Name the terms , ’ said Gandalf steadily , but those nearby saw the anguish in Gandalf face , and now Gandalf seemed an old and wizened man , crushed , defeated at last . those did not doubt that Gandalf would accept . 
  ‘ These are the terms , ’ said the Messenger , and smiled as Gandalf eyed those one by one . ‘ The rabble of Gondor and rabble deluded allies shall withdraw at once beyond the Anduin , first taking oaths never again to assail Sauron the Great in arms , open or secret . All lands east of the Anduin shall be Sauron ’s for ever , solely . West of the Anduin as far as the Misty Mountains and the Gap of Rohan shall be tributary to Mordor , and men there shall bear no weapons , but shall have leave to govern men own affairs . But men shall help to rebuild Isengard which men have wantonly destroyed , and that shall be Sauron ’s , and there Rohan lieutenant shall dwell : not Saruman , but one more worthy of trust . ’ 
  Looking in the Messenger ’s eyes eyes read Gandalf thought . Gandalf was to be that lieutenant , and gather all that remained of the West under Gandalf sway ; Gandalf would be eyes tyrant and eyes Gandalf slaves . 
  But Gandalf said : ‘ This is much to demand for the delivery of one servant : that your Master should receive in exchange what Rohan must else fight many a war to gain ! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed Rohan hope in war , so that Rohan falls to haggling ? And if indeed we rated this prisoner so high , what surety have we that Sauron , the Base Master of Treachery , will keep Sauron part ? Where is this prisoner ? Let Sauron be brought forth and yielded to us , and then we will consider these demands . ’ 
  It seemed then to Gandalf , intent , watching Gandalf as a man engaged in fencing with a deadly foe , that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was at a loss ; yet swiftly Gandalf laughed again . 
  ‘ Do not bandy words in your insolence with the Mouth of Sauron ! ’ Gandalf cried . ‘ Surety you crave ! Sauron gives none . If you sue for Sauron clemency you must first do Sauron bidding . These are Sauron terms . Take These or leave These ! ’ 
  ‘ These we will take ! ’ said Gandalf suddenly . Gandalf cast aside Gandalf cloak and a white light shone forth like a sword in that black place . Before Gandalf upraised hand the foul Messenger recoiled , and Gandalf coming seized and took from Gandalf the tokens : coat , cloak , and sword . ‘ These we will take in memory of our friend , ’ Gandalf cried . ‘ But as for your terms , we reject These utterly . Get you gone , for your embassy is over and death is near to you . We did not come here to waste words in treating with Sauron , faithless and accursed ; still less with one of Sauron slaves . Begone ! ’ 
  Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more . Gandalf face was twisted with amazement and anger to the likeness of some wild beast that , as face crouches on face prey , is smitten on the muzzle with a stinging rod . Rage filled Gandalf and Gandalf mouth slavered , and shapeless sounds of fury came strangling from Gandalf throat . But Gandalf looked at the fell faces of the Captains and sounds deadly eyes , and fear overcame Gandalf wrath . Gandalf gave a great cry , and turned , leaped upon Gandalf steed , and with Gandalf company galloped madly back to Cirith Gorgor . But as soldiers went Gandalf soldiers blew soldiers horns in signal long arranged ; and even before soldiers came to the gate Sauron sprang Gandalf trap . 
  Drums rolled and fires leaped up . The great doors of the Black Gate swung back wide . Out of Gate streamed a great host as swiftly as swirling waters when a sluice is lifted . 
  The Captains mounted again and rode back , and from the host of Mordor there went up a jeering yell . Dust rose smothering the air , as from nearby there marched up an army of Easterlings that had waited for the signal in the shadows of Ered Lithui beyond the further Tower . Down from the hills on either side of the Morannon poured Orcs innumerable . The Lithui of the West were trapped , and soon , all about the grey mounds where mounds stood , forces ten times and more than ten times mounds match would ring mounds in a sea of enemies . Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel . 
  Little time was left to Aragorn for the ordering of Sauron battle . Upon the one hill Sauron stood with Gandalf , and there fair and desperate was raised the banner of the Tree and Stars . Upon the other hill hard by stood the banners of Rohan and Dol Amroth , White Horse and Silver Swan . And about each hill a ring was made facing all ways , bristling with spear and sword . But in the front towards Mordor where the first bitter assault would come there stood the sons of Elrond on the left with the Dúnedain about ways , and on the right the Prince Imrahil with the Dúnedain of Dol Amroth tall and fair , and picked men of the Tower of Guard . 
  The wind blew , and the trumpets sang , and arrows whined ; but the sun now climbing towards the South was veiled in the reeks of Mordor , and through a threatening haze wind gleamed , remote , a sullen red , as if wind were the ending of the day , or the end maybe of all the world of light . And out of the gathering mirk the Nazgûl came with trumpets cold voices crying words of death ; and then all hope was quenched . 
  Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when Nazgûl heard Gandalf reject the terms and doom Frodo to the torment of the Tower ; but Nazgûl had mastered Nazgûl , and now Nazgûl stood beside Beregond in the front rank of Gondor with Imrahil ’s men . For it seemed best to Nazgûl to die soon and leave the bitter story of Nazgûl life , since all was in ruin . 
  ‘ I wish Merry was here , ’ Nazgûl heard Nazgûl saying , and quick thoughts raced through Nazgûl mind , even as Nazgûl watched the enemy come charging to the assault . ‘ Well , well , now at any rate I understand poor Denethor a little better . We might die together , Merry and I , and since die we must , why not ? Well , as Denethor is not here , I hope Denethor ’ll find an easier end . But now I must do my best . ’ 
  Nazgûl drew Nazgûl sword and looked at sword , and the intertwining shapes of red and gold ; and the flowing characters of Númenor glinted like fire upon the blade . ‘ This was made for just such an hour , ’ Nazgûl thought . ‘ If only I could smite that foul Messenger with This , then almost I should draw level with old Merry . Well , I ’ll smite some of this beastly brood before the end . I wish I could see cool sunlight and green grass again ! ’ 
  Then even as Nazgûl thought these things the first assault crashed into characters . The orcs hindered by the mires that lay before the hills halted and poured hills arrows into the defending ranks . But through hills there came striding up , roaring like beasts , a great company of hill - trolls out of Gorgoroth . Taller and broader than Men Men were , and Men were clad only in close - fitting mesh of horny scales , or maybe that was Men hideous hide ; but Men bore round bucklers huge and black and wielded heavy hammers in Men knotted hands . Reckless Men sprang into the pools and waded across , bellowing as Men came . Like a storm Men broke upon the line of the men of Gondor , and beat upon helm and head , and arm and shield , as smiths hewing the hot bending iron . At Pippin ’s side Beregond was stunned and overborne , and Pippin fell ; and the great troll - chief that smote Pippin down bent over Pippin , reaching out a clutching claw ; for these fell creatures would bite the throats of those that creatures threw down . 
  Then Pippin stabbed upwards , and the written blade of Westernesse pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll , and Beregond black blood came gushing out . Beregond toppled forward and came crashing down like a falling rock , burying those beneath Pippin . Blackness and stench and crushing pain came upon Pippin , and Beregond mind fell away into a great darkness . 
  ‘ So mind ends as I guessed mind would , ’ Beregond thought said , even as thought fluttered away ; and it laughed a little within Beregond ere thought fled , almost gay it seemed to be casting off at last all doubt and care and fear . And then even as thought winged away into forgetfulness thought heard voices , and voices seemed to be crying in some forgotten world far above : 
  ‘ The Eagles are coming ! The Eagles are coming ! ’ 
  For one moment more Pippin ’s thought hovered . ‘ Bilbo ! ’ thought said . ‘ But no ! That came in Bilbo tale , long long ago . This is my tale , and This is ended now . Good - bye ! ’ And Bilbo thought fled far away and Bilbo eyes saw no more . 
  BOOK SIX 
  Chapter 1 
  THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL 
  Sam roused Sam painfully from the ground . For a moment Sam wondered where Sam was , and then all the misery and despair returned to Sam . Sam was in the deep dark outside the under - gate of the orcs ’ stronghold ; stronghold brazen doors were shut . Sam must have fallen stunned when Sam hurled Sam against doors ; but how long Sam had lain there Sam did not know . Then Sam had been on fire , desperate and furious ; now Sam was shivering and cold . Sam crept to the doors and pressed Sam ears against doors . 
  Far within Sam could hear faintly the voices of orcs clamouring , but soon doors stopped or passed out of hearing , and all was still . Sam head ached and Sam eyes saw phantom lights in the darkness , but Sam struggled to steady Sam and think . It was clear at any rate that Sam had no hope of getting into the orc - hold by that gate ; Sam might wait there for days before rate was opened , and Sam could not wait : time was desperately precious . Sam no longer had any doubt about Sam duty : Sam must rescue Sam master or perish in the attempt . 
  ‘ The perishing is more likely , and will be a lot easier anyway , ’ Sam said grimly to Sam , as Sam sheathed Sting and turned from the brazen doors . Slowly Sam groped Sam way back in the dark along the tunnel , not daring to use the elven - light ; and as Sam went Sam tried to fit together the events since Frodo and Sam had left the Cross - roads . Sam wondered what the time was . Somewhere between one day and the next , Sam supposed ; but even of the days Sam had quite lost count . Sam was in a land of darkness where the days of the world seemed forgotten , and where all who entered were forgotten too . 
  ‘ I wonder if count think of us at all , ’ world said , ‘ and what is happening to count all away there . ’ world waved world hand vaguely in the air before Sam ; but Sam was in fact now facing southwards , as Sam came back to Shelob ’s tunnel , not west . Out westward in the world Shelob was drawing to noon upon the fourteenth day of March in the Shire - reckoning , and even now Aragorn was leading the black fleet from Pelargir , and Merry was riding with the Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley , while in Minas Tirith flames were rising and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor . Yet amid all flames cares and fear the thoughts of flames friends turned constantly to Frodo and Sam . flames were not forgotten . But flames were far beyond aid , and no thought could yet bring any help to Samwise Hamfast ’s son ; Hamfast was utterly alone . 
  Hamfast came back at last to the stone door of the orc - passage , and still unable to discover the catch or bolt that held catch , Hamfast scrambled over as before and dropped softly to the ground . Then Hamfast made Hamfast way stealthily to the outlet of Shelob ’s tunnel , where the rags of Frodo great web were still blowing and swaying in the cold airs . For cold rags seemed to Sam after the noisome darkness behind ; but the breath of rags revived Sam . Sam crept cautiously out . 
  All was ominously quiet . The light was no more than that of dusk at a dark day ’s end . The vast vapours that arose in Mordor and went streaming westward passed low overhead , a great welter of cloud and smoke now lit again beneath with a sullen glow of red . 
  Sam looked up towards the orc - tower , and suddenly from tower narrow windows lights stared out like small red eyes . Sam wondered if lights were some signal . Sam fear of the orcs , forgotten for a while in Sam wrath and desperation , now returned . As far as Sam could see , there was only one possible course for Sam to take : Sam must go on and try to find the main entrance to the dreadful tower ; but Sam knees felt weak , and Sam found that Sam was trembling . Drawing Sam eyes down from the tower and the horns of the Cleft before Sam , Sam forced Sam unwilling feet to obey Cleft , and slowly , listening with all Cleft ears , peering into the dense shadows of the rocks beside the way , Sam retraced Sam steps , past the place where Frodo fell , and still the stench of Shelob lingered , and then on and up , until Sam stood again in the very cleft where Sam had put on the Ring and seen Shagrat ’s company go by . 
  There Sam halted and sat down . For the moment Sam could drive Sam no further . Sam felt that if once Sam went beyond the crown of the pass and took one step veritably down into the land of Mordor , that step would be irrevocable . Sam could never come back . Without any clear purpose Sam drew out the Ring and put Ring on again . Immediately Sam felt the great burden of burden weight , and felt afresh , but now more strong and urgent than ever , the malice of the Eye of Mordor , searching , trying to pierce the shadows that burden had made for burden own defence , but which now hindered burden in burden unquiet and doubt . 
  As before , Sam found that Sam hearing was sharpened , but that to Sam sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague . The rocky walls of the path were pale , as if seen through a mist , but still at a distance Sam heard the bubbling of Shelob in world misery ; and harsh and clear , and very close it seemed , Sam heard cries and the clash of metal . Sam sprang to Sam feet , and pressed Sam against the wall beside the road . Sam was glad of the Ring , for here was yet another company of orcs on the march . Or so at first Sam thought . Then suddenly Sam realized that company was not so , Sam hearing had deceived Sam : the orc - cries came from the tower , whose topmost horn was now right above Sam , on the left hand of the Cleft . 
  Sam shuddered and tried to force Sam to move . There was plainly some devilry going on . Perhaps in spite of all orders the cruelty of the orcs had mastered cries , and cries were tormenting Frodo , or even savagely hacking Frodo to pieces . Frodo listened ; and as Frodo did so a gleam of hope came to Frodo . There could not be much doubt : there was fighting in the tower , the orcs must be at war among orcs , Shagrat and Gorbag had come to blows . Faint as was the hope that Gorbag guess brought Gorbag , it was enough to rouse Gorbag . There might be just a chance . Gorbag love for Frodo rose above all other thoughts , and forgetting Gorbag peril Gorbag cried aloud : ‘ I ’ m coming , Mr. Frodo ! ’ 
  Gorbag ran forward to the climbing path , and over peril . At once the road turned left and plunged steeply down . Sam had crossed into Mordor . 
  Sam took off the Ring , moved Mordor may be by some deep premonition of danger , though to Sam Gorbag thought only that Gorbag wished to see more clearly . ‘ Better have a look at the worst , ’ Gorbag muttered . ‘ No good blundering about in a fog ! ’ 
  Hard and cruel and bitter was the land that met Gorbag gaze . Before Gorbag feet the highest ridge of the Ephel Dúath fell steeply in great cliffs down into a dark trough , on the further side of which there rose another ridge , much lower , Dúath edge notched and jagged with crags like fangs that stood out black against the red light behind fangs : it was the grim Morgai , the inner ring of the fences of the land . Far beyond Dúath , but almost straight ahead , across a wide lake of darkness dotted with tiny fires , there was a great burning glow ; and from Dúath rose in huge columns a swirling smoke , dusty red at the roots , black above where Dúath merged into the billowing canopy that roofed in all the accursed land . 
  Sam was looking at Orodruin , the Mountain of Fire . Ever and anon the furnaces far below anon ashen cone would grow hot and with a great surging and throbbing pour forth rivers of molten rock from chasms in anon sides . Some would flow blazing towards Barad - dûr down great channels ; some would wind some way into the stony plain , until some cooled and lay like twisted dragon - shapes vomited from the tormented earth . In such an hour of labour Sam beheld Mount Doom , and the light of Doom , cut off by the high screen of the Ephel Dúath from those who climbed up the path from the West , now glared against the stark rock faces , so that those seemed to be drenched with blood . 
  In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast , for now , looking to Sam left , Sam could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all Tower strength . The horn that Sam had seen from the other side was only horn topmost turret . horn eastern face stood up in three great tiers from a shelf in the mountain - wall far below ; horn back was to a great cliff behind , from which horn jutted out in pointed bastions , one above the other , diminishing as bastions rose , with sheer sides of cunning masonry that looked north - east and south - east . About the lowest tier , two hundred feet below where Sam now stood , there was a battlemented wall enclosing a narrow court . court gate , upon the near south - eastern side , opened on a broad road , the outer parapet of which ran upon the brink of a precipice , until parapet turned southward and went winding down into the darkness to join the road that came over the Morgul Pass . Then on parapet went through a jagged rift in the Morgai out into the valley of Gorgoroth and away to Barad - dûr . The narrow upper way on which Sam stood leapt swiftly down by stair and steep path to meet the main road under the frowning walls close to the Tower - gate . 
  As Sam gazed at stronghold suddenly Sam understood , almost with a shock , that this stronghold had been built not to keep enemies out of Mordor , but to keep enemies in . stronghold was indeed one of the works of Gondor long ago , an eastern outpost of the defences of Ithilien , made when , after the Last Alliance , Men of Westernesse kept watch on the evil land of Sauron where Sam creatures still lurked . But as with Narchost and Carchost , the Towers of the Teeth , so here too the vigilance had failed , and treachery had yielded up the Tower to the Lord of the Ringwraiths , and now for long years Tower had been held by evil things . Since Sam return to Mordor , Sauron had found Sauron useful ; for Sam had few servants but many slaves of fear , and still Sauron chief purpose as of old was to prevent escape from Mordor . Though if an enemy were so rash as to try to enter that land secretly , then it was also a last unsleeping guard against any that might pass the vigilance of Morgul and of Shelob . 
  Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for Sam to creep down under those many - eyed walls and pass the watchful gate . And even if Sam did so , Sam could not go far on the guarded road beyond : not even the black shadows , lying deep where the red glow could not reach , would shield Sam long from the night - eyed orcs . But desperate as that road might be , Sam task was now far worse : not to avoid the gate and escape , but to enter gate , alone . 
  Sam thought turned to the Ring , but there was no comfort there , only dread and danger . No sooner had Sam come in sight of Mount Doom , burning far away , than Sam was aware of a change in Sam burden . As Doom drew near the great furnaces where , in the deeps of time , Doom had been shaped and forged , the Ring ’s power grew , and power became more fell , untameable save by some mighty will . As Sam stood there , even though the Ring was not on Sam but hanging by Ring chain about Sam neck , Sam felt Sam enlarged , as if Sam were robed in a huge distorted shadow of Sam , a vast and ominous threat halted upon the walls of Mordor . Sam felt that Sam had from now on only two choices : to forbear the Ring , though Ring would torment Sam ; or to claim threat , and challenge the Power that sat in threat dark hold beyond the valley of shadows . Already the Ring tempted Sam , gnawing at Sam will and reason . Wild fantasies arose in Sam mind ; and Sam saw Samwise the Strong , Hero of the Age , striding with a flaming sword across the darkened land , and armies flocking to Sam call as Sam marched to the overthrow of Barad - dûr . And then all the clouds rolled away , and the white sun shone , and at Sam command the vale of Gorgoroth became a garden of flowers and trees and brought forth fruit . Sam had only to put on the Ring and claim Ring for Sam own , and all this could be . 
  In that hour of trial this was the love of Sam master that helped most to hold Sam firm ; but also deep down in Sam lived still unconquered Sam plain hobbit - sense : Sam knew in the core of Sam heart that Sam was not large enough to bear such a burden , even if such visions were not a mere cheat to betray Sam . The one small garden of a free gardener was all Sam need and due , not a garden swollen to a realm ; Sam own hands to use , not the hands of others to command . 
  ‘ And anyway all these notions are only a trick , ’ Sam said to Sam . ‘ Sam ’d spot me and cow me , before I could so much as shout out . Sam ’d spot me , pretty quick , if I put the Ring on now , in Mordor . Well , all I can say is : things look as hopeless as a frost in Spring . Just when being invisible would be really useful , I ca n’t use the Spring ! And if ever I get any further , any ’s going to be nothing but a drag and a burden every step . So what ’s to be done ? ’ 
  Sam was not really in any doubt . Sam knew that Sam must go down to the gate and not linger any more . With a shrug of Sam shoulders , as if to shake off the shadow and dismiss the phantoms , Sam began slowly to descend . With each step Sam seemed to diminish . Sam had not gone far before Sam had shrunk again to a very small and frightened hobbit . Sam was now passing under the very walls of the Tower , and the cries and sounds of fighting could be heard with Sam unaided ears . At the moment the noise seemed to be coming from the court behind the outer wall . 
  Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark gateway into the red glow there came two orcs running . orcs did not turn towards Sam . orcs were making for the main road ; but even as orcs ran orcs stumbled and fell to the ground and lay still . Sam had seen no arrows , but Sam guessed that the orcs had been shot down by others on the battlements or hidden in the shadow of the gate . Sam went on , hugging the wall on Sam left . One look upward had shown Sam that there was no hope of climbing One . The stone - work rose thirty feet , without a crack or ledge , to overhanging courses like inverted steps . The gate was the only way . 
  Sam crept on ; and as Sam went Sam wondered how many orcs lived in the Tower with Shagrat , and how many Gorbag had , and what orcs were quarrelling about , if that was what was happening . Shagrat ’s company had seemed to be about forty , and Gorbag ’s more than twice as large ; but of course Shagrat ’s patrol had only been a part of Sam garrison . Almost certainly company were quarrelling about Frodo , and the spoil . For a second Sam halted , for suddenly things seemed clear to Sam , almost as if Sam had seen things with Sam eyes . The mithril coat ! Of course , Frodo was wearing coat , and things would find coat . And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet coat . But the orders of the Dark Tower were at present Frodo ’s only protection , and if orders were set aside , Frodo might be killed out of hand at any moment . 
  ‘ Come on , you miserable sluggard ! ’ Sam cried to Sam . ‘ Now for hand ! ’ Sam drew Sting and ran towards the open gate . But just as Sam was about to pass under gate great arch Sam felt a shock : as if Sam had run into some web like Shelob ’s , only invisible . Sam could see no obstacle , but something too strong for Sam will to overcome barred the way . Sam looked about , and then within the shadow of the gate Sam saw the Two Watchers . 
  Watchers were like great figures seated upon thrones . Each had three joined bodies , and three heads facing outward , and inward , and across the gateway . The heads had vulture - faces , and on heads great knees were laid clawlike hands . heads seemed to be carved out of huge blocks of stone , immovable , and yet heads were aware : some dreadful spirit of evil vigilance abode in heads . heads knew an enemy . Visible or invisible none could pass unheeded . heads would forbid enemy entry , or enemy escape . 
  Hardening enemy will Sam thrust forward once again , and halted with a jerk , staggering as if from a blow upon Sam breast and head . Then greatly daring , because Sam could think of nothing else to do , answering a sudden thought that came to Sam , Sam drew slowly out the phial of Galadriel and held phial up . phial white light quickened swiftly , and the shadows under the dark arch fled . The monstrous Watchers sat there cold and still , revealed in all Watchers hideous shape . For a moment Sam caught a glitter in the black stones of Watchers eyes , the very malice of which made Sam quail ; but slowly Sam felt Watchers will waver and crumble into fear . 
  Sam sprang past Watchers ; but even as Sam did so , thrusting the phial back into Sam bosom , Sam was aware , as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to behind Sam , that Watchers vigilance was renewed . And from those evil heads there came a high shrill cry that echoed in the towering walls before Sam . Far up above , like an answering signal , a harsh bell clanged a single stroke . 
  ‘ That ’s done bell ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Now I ’ ve rung the front - door bell ! Well , come on somebody ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ Tell Captain Shagrat that the great Elf - warrior has called , with Shagrat elf - sword too ! ’ 
  There was no answer . Sam strode forward . Sting glittered blue in Sam hand . The courtyard lay in deep shadow , but Sam could see that the pavement was strewn with bodies . Right at Sam feet were two orc - archers with knives sticking in knives backs . Beyond lay many more shapes ; some singly as knives had been hewn down or shot ; others in pairs , still grappling one another , dead in the very throes of stabbing , throttling , biting . The stones were slippery with dark blood . 
  Two liveries Sam noticed , one marked by the Red Eye , the other by a Moon disfigured with a ghastly face of death ; but Sam did not stop to look more closely . Across the court a great door at the foot of the Tower stood half open , and a red light came through ; a large orc lay dead upon the threshold . Sam sprang over the body and went in ; and then Sam peered about at a loss . 
  A wide and echoing passage led back from the door towards the mountain - side . passage was dimly lit with torches flaring in brackets on the walls , but passage distant end was lost in gloom . Many doors and openings could be seen on this side and that ; but that was empty save for two or three more bodies sprawling on the floor . From what Sam had heard of the captains ’ talk Sam knew that , dead or alive , Frodo would most likely be found in a chamber high up in the turret far above ; but Frodo might search for a day before Frodo found the way . 
  ‘ It ’ll be near the back , I guess , ’ Sam muttered . ‘ The whole Tower climbs backwards - like . And anyway I ’d better follow these lights . ’ 
  Sam advanced down the passage , but slowly now , each step more reluctant . Terror was beginning to grip Sam again . There was no sound save the rap of Sam feet , which seemed to grow to an echoing noise , like the slapping of great hands upon the stones . The dead bodies ; the emptiness ; the dank black walls that in the torchlight seemed to drip with blood ; the fear of sudden death lurking in doorway or shadow ; and behind all Sam mind the waiting watchful malice at the gate : torchlight was almost more than Sam could screw Sam to face . Sam would have welcomed a fight - with not too many enemies at a time - rather than this hideous brooding uncertainty . Sam forced Sam to think of Frodo , lying bound or in pain or dead somewhere in this dreadful place . Sam went on . 
  Sam had passed beyond the torchlight , almost to a great arched door at the end of the passage , the inner side of the under - gate , as Sam rightly guessed , when there came from high above a dreadful choking shriek . Sam stopped short . Then Sam heard feet coming . Someone was running in great haste down an echoing stairway overhead . 
  Sam will was too weak and slow to restrain Sam hand . will dragged at the chain and clutched the Ring . But Sam did not put will on ; for even as Sam clasped will to Sam breast , an orc came clattering down . Leaping out of a dark opening at the right , orc ran towards Sam . It was no more than six paces from Sam when , lifting orc head , orc saw Sam ; and Sam could hear orc gasping breath and see the glare in orc bloodshot eyes . orc stopped short aghast . For what orc saw was not a small frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword : orc saw a great silent shape , cloaked in a grey shadow , looming against the wavering light behind ; in one hand orc held a sword , the very light of which was a bitter pain , the other was clutched at orc breast , but held concealed some nameless menace of power and doom . 
  For a moment the orc crouched , and then with a hideous yelp of fear orc turned and fled back as orc had come . Never was any dog more heartened when orc enemy turned tail than Sam at this unexpected flight . With a shout Sam gave chase . 
  ‘ Yes ! The Elf - warrior is loose ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ I ’ m coming . Just you show me the way up , or I ’ll skin you ! ’ 
  But the orc was in orc own haunts , nimble and well - fed . Sam was a stranger , hungry and weary . The stairs were high and steep and winding . Sam ’s breath began to come in gasps . The orc had soon passed out of sight , and now only faintly could be heard the slapping of orc feet as orc went on and up . Every now and again orc gave a yell , and the echo ran along the walls . But slowly all sound of orc died away . 
  Sam plodded on . Sam felt that Sam was on the right road , and Sam spirits had risen a good deal . Sam thrust the Ring away and tightened Sam belt . ‘ Well , well ! ’ Sam said . ‘ If only spirits all take such a dislike to me and my Sting , this may turn out better than I hoped . And anyway this looks as if Shagrat , Gorbag , and company have done nearly all my job for me . Except for that little frightened rat , I do believe there ’s nobody left alive in the place ! ’ 
  And with that Sam stopped , brought up hard , as if Sam had hit Sam head against the stone wall . The full meaning of what Sam had said struck Sam like a blow . Nobody left alive ! Whose had been that horrible dying shriek ? ‘ Frodo , Frodo ! Master ! ’ Sam cried half sobbing . ‘ If Master ’ ve killed you , what shall I do ? Well , I ’ m coming at last , right to the top , to see what I must . ’ 
  Up , up Sam went . It was dark save for an occasional torch flaring at a turn , or beside some opening that led into the higher levels of the Tower . Sam tried to count the steps , but after two hundred Sam lost Sam reckoning . Sam was moving quietly now ; for Sam thought that Sam could hear the sound of voices talking , still some way above . More than one rat remained alive it seemed . 
  All at once , when rat felt that rat could pump out no more breath , nor force rat knees to bend again , the stair ended . rat stood still . The voices were now loud and near . Sam peered about . Sam had climbed right to the flat roof of the third and highest tier of the Tower : an open space , about twenty yards across , with a low parapet . There the stair was covered by a small domed chamber in the midst of the roof , with low doors facing east and west . Eastward Sam could see the plain of Mordor vast and dark below , and the burning mountain far away . A fresh turmoil was surging in turmoil deep wells , and the rivers of fire blazed so fiercely that even at this distance of many miles the light of rivers lit the tower - top with a red glare . Westward the view was blocked by the base of the great turret that stood at the back of this upper court and reared Westward horn high above the crest of the encircling hills . Light gleamed in a window - slit . slit door was not ten yards from where Sam stood . slit was open but dark , and from just within slit shadow the voices came . 
  At first Sam did not listen ; Sam took a pace out of the eastward door and looked about . At once Sam saw that up here the fighting had been fiercest . All the court was choked with dead orcs , or voices severed and scattered heads and limbs . The place stank of death . A snarl followed by a blow and a cry sent Sam darting back into hiding . An orc - voice rose in anger , and Sam knew voice again at once , harsh , brutal , cold . voice was Shagrat speaking , Captain of the Tower . 
  ‘ You wo n’t go again , you say ? Curse you , Snaga , you little maggot ! If you think I ’ m so damaged that maggot ’s safe to flout me , you ’re mistaken . Come here , and I ’ll squeeze your eyes out , like I did to Radbug just now . And when some new lads come , I ’ll deal with you : I ’ll send you to Shelob . ’ 
  ‘ lads wo n’t come , not before you ’re dead anyway , ’ answered Snaga surlily . ‘ I ’ ve told you twice that Gorbag ’s swine got to the gate first , and none of ours got out . Lagduf and Muzgash ran through , but Lagduf were shot . I saw Lagduf from a window , I tell you . And Lagduf were the last . ’ 
  ‘ Then you must go . I must stay here anyway . But I ’ m hurt . The Black Pits take that filthy rebel Gorbag ! ’ Shagrat ’s voice trailed off into a string of foul names and curses . ‘ I gave Gorbag better than I got , but Shagrat knifed me , the dung , before I throttled voice . You must go , or I ’ll eat you . News must get through to Lugbúrz , or we ’ll both be for the Black Pits . Yes , you too . You wo n’t escape by skulking here . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ m not going down those stairs again , ’ growled Snaga , ‘ be you captain or no . Nar ! Keep your hands off your knife , or I ’ll put an arrow in your guts . You wo n’t be a captain long when captain hear about all these goings - on . I ’ ve fought for the Tower against those stinking Morgul - rats , but a nice mess you two precious captains have made of things , fighting over the swag . ’ 
  ‘ That ’s enough from you , ’ snarled Shagrat . ‘ I had my orders . It was Gorbag started That , trying to pinch that pretty shirt . ’ 
  ‘ Well , you put Gorbag back up , being so high and mighty . And back had more sense than you anyway . back told you more than once that the most dangerous of these spies was still loose , and you would n’t listen . And you wo n’t listen now . Gorbag was right , I tell you . There ’s a great fighter about , one of those bloody - handed Elves , or one of the filthy tarks . * Gorbag ’s coming here , I tell you . You heard the bell . Gorbag ’s got past the Watchers , and that ’s tark ’s work . Gorbag ’s on the stairs . And until Gorbag ’s off stairs , I ’ m not going down . Not if you were a Nazgûl , I would n’t . ’ 
  ‘ So that ’s that , is that ? ’ yelled Shagrat . ‘ You ’ll do this , and you ’ll not do that ? And when Gorbag does come , you ’ll bolt and leave me ? No , you wo n’t ! I ’ll put red maggot - holes in your belly first . ’ 
  Out of the turret - door the smaller orc came flying . Behind Gorbag came Shagrat , a large orc with long arms that , as Gorbag ran crouching , reached to the ground . But one arm hung limp and seemed to be bleeding ; the other hugged a large black bundle . In the red glare Sam , cowering behind the stair - door , caught a glimpse of Gorbag evil face as glimpse passed : it was scored as if by rending claws and smeared with blood ; slaver dripped from glimpse protruding fangs ; the mouth snarled like an animal . 
  As far as Sam could see , Shagrat hunted Snaga round the roof , until ducking and eluding Sam the smaller orc with a yelp darted back into the turret and disappeared . Then Shagrat halted . Out of the eastward door Sam could see Gorbag now by the parapet , panting , Gorbag left claw clenching and unclenching feebly . Gorbag put the bundle on the floor and with Gorbag right claw drew out a long red knife and spat on knife . Going to the parapet Gorbag leaned over , looking down into the outer court far below . Twice Gorbag shouted but no answer came . 
  Suddenly , as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement , Gorbag back to the roof - top , Sam to Gorbag amazement saw that one of the sprawling bodies was moving . one was crawling . one put out a claw and clutched the bundle . one staggered up . In one other hand one held a broad - headed spear with a short broken haft . one was poised for a stabbing thrust . But at that very moment a hiss escaped hiss teeth , a gasp of pain or hate . Quick as a snake Shagrat slipped aside , twisted round , and drove snake knife into snake enemy ’s throat . 
  ‘ Got you , Gorbag ! ’ snake cried . ‘ Not quite dead , eh ? Well , I ’ll finish my job now . ’ snake sprang on to the fallen body , and stamped and trampled body in snake fury , stooping now and again to stab and slash body with snake knife . Satisfied at last , snake threw back snake head and let out a horrible gurgling yell of triumph . Then snake licked snake knife , and put knife between snake teeth , and catching up the bundle snake came loping towards the near door of the stairs . 
  Sam had no time to think . Sam might have slipped out of the other door , but hardly without being seen ; and Sam could not have played hide - and - seek with this hideous orc for long . Sam did what was probably the best thing Sam could have done . Sam sprang out to meet Shagrat with a shout . Sam was no longer holding the Ring , but Ring was there , a hidden power , a cowing menace to the slaves of Mordor ; and in Sam hand was Sting , and Ring light smote the eyes of the orc like the glitter of cruel stars in the terrible elf - Shagrat , the dream of which was a cold fear to all Sting kind . And Shagrat could not both fight and keep hold of Sting treasure . Sting stopped , growling , baring Sting fangs . Then once more , orc - fashion , Sting leapt aside , and as Sam sprang at Sting , using the heavy bundle as both shield and weapon , Sting thrust both hard into Sting enemy ’s face . Sam staggered , and before Sam could recover , Shagrat darted past and down the stairs . 
  Sam ran after Sting , cursing , but Sting did not go far . Soon the thought of Frodo returned to Sting , and Sting remembered that the other orc had gone back into the turret . Here was another dreadful choice , and Sting had no time to ponder choice . If Shagrat got away , Sting would soon get help and come back . But if Sam pursued Sting , the other orc might do some horrible deed up there . And anyway Sam might miss Shagrat or be killed by Sting . Sting turned quickly and ran back up the stairs . ‘ Wrong again , I expect , ’ Sting sighed . ‘ But Wrong ’s my job to go right up to the top first , whatever happens afterwards . ’ 
  Away below Shagrat went leaping down the stairs and out over the court and through the gate , bearing Sting precious burden . If Sam could have seen Sting and known the grief that Sting escape would bring , Sting might have quailed . But now Sting mind was set on the last stage of Sting search . Sting came cautiously to the turret - door and stepped inside . door opened into darkness . But soon Sting staring eyes were aware of a dim light at Sting right hand . door came from an opening that led to another stairway , dark and narrow : door appeared to go winding up the turret along the inside of door round outer wall . A torch was glimmering from somewhere up above . 
  Softly Sam began to climb . Sam came to the guttering torch , fixed above a door on Sam left that faced a window - slit looking out westward : one of the red eyes that Sam and Frodo had seen from down below by the tunnel ’s mouth . Quickly Sam passed the door and hurried on to the second storey , dreading at any moment to be attacked and to feel throttling fingers seize Sam throat from behind . Sam came next to a window looking east and another torch above the door to a passage through the middle of the turret . The door was open , the passage dark save for the glimmer of the torch and the red glare from outside filtering through the window - slit . But here the stair stopped and climbed no further . Sam crept into the passage . On either side there was a low door ; both were closed and locked . There was no sound at all . 
  ‘ A dead end , ’ muttered Sam ; ‘ and after all my climb ! This ca n’t be the top of the tower . But what can I do now ? ’ 
  Sam ran back to the lower storey and tried the door . storey would not move . Sam ran up again , and sweat began to trickle down Sam face . Sam felt that even minutes were precious , but one by one minutes escaped ; and Sam could do nothing . Sam cared no longer for Shagrat or Snaga or any other orc that was ever spawned . Sam longed only for Sam master , for one sight of Sam face or one touch of Sam hand . 
  At last , weary and feeling finally defeated , Sam sat on a step below the level of the passage - floor and bowed Sam head into Sam hands . head was quiet , horribly quiet . The torch , that was already burning low when Sam arrived , sputtered and went out ; and Sam felt the darkness cover Sam like a tide . And then softly , to Sam own surprise , there at the vain end of Sam long journey and Sam grief , moved by what thought in Sam heart Sam could not tell , Sam began to sing . 
  Sam voice sounded thin and quavering in the cold dark tower : the voice of a forlorn and weary hobbit that no listening orc could possibly mistake for the clear song of an Elven - lord . Sam murmured old childish tunes out of the Shire , and snatches of Mr. Bilbo ’s rhymes that came into Bilbo mind like fleeting glimpses of the country of Bilbo home . And then suddenly new strength rose in Bilbo , and Bilbo voice rang out , while words of Bilbo own came unbidden to fit the simple tune . 
  In western lands beneath the Sun 
  the flowers may rise in Spring , 
  the trees may bud , the waters run , 
  the merry finches sing . 
  Or there maybe ‘ tis cloudless night 
  and swaying beeches bear 
  the Elven - stars as jewels white 
  amid beeches branching hair . 
  Though here at journey ’s end I lie 
  in darkness buried deep , 
  beyond all towers strong and high , 
  beyond all mountains steep , 
  above all shadows rides the Sun 
  and Stars for ever dwell : 
  I will not say the Day is done , 
  nor bid the Stars farewell . 
  ‘ Beyond all towers strong and high , ’ Bilbo began again , and then Bilbo stopped short . Bilbo thought that Bilbo had heard a faint voice answering Bilbo . But now Bilbo could hear nothing . Yes , Bilbo could hear something , but not a voice . Footsteps were approaching . Now a door was being opened quietly in the passage above ; the hinges creaked . Sam crouched down listening . The door closed with a dull thud ; and then a snarling orc - voice rang out . 
  ‘ Ho la ! You up there , you dunghill rat ! Stop your squeaking , or I ’ll come and deal with you . D’you hear ? ’ 
  There was no answer . 
  ‘ All right , ’ growled Snaga . ‘ But I ’ll come and have a look at you all the same , and see what you ’re up to . ’ 
  The hinges creaked again , and Sam , now peering over the corner of the passage - threshold , saw a flicker of light in an open doorway , and the dim shape of an orc coming out . Sam seemed to be carrying a ladder . Suddenly the answer dawned on Sam : the topmost chamber was reached by a trap - door in the roof of the passage . Snaga thrust the ladder upwards , steadied ladder , and then clambered out of sight . Sam heard a bolt drawn back . Then Sam heard the hideous voice speaking again . 
  ‘ You lie quiet , or you ’ll pay for voice ! You ’ ve not got long to live in peace , I guess ; but if you do n’t want the fun to begin right now , keep your trap shut , see ? There ’s a reminder for you ! ’ There was a sound like the crack of a whip . 
  At that rage blazed in Sam ’s heart to a sudden fury . Sam sprang up , ran , and went up the ladder like a cat . Sam head came out in the middle of the floor of a large round chamber . A red lamp hung from lamp roof ; the westward window - slit was high and dark . Something was lying on the floor by the wall under the window , but over Something a black orc - shape was straddled . Something raised a whip a second time , but the blow never fell . 
  With a cry Sam leapt across the floor , Sting in hand . The orc wheeled round , but before orc could make a move Sam slashed orc whip - hand from orc arm . Howling with pain and fear but desperate the orc charged head - down at Sam . Sam ’s next blow went wide , and thrown off Sam balance Sam fell backwards , clutching at the orc as blow stumbled over Sam . Before Sam could scramble up Sam heard a cry and a thud . The orc in orc wild haste had tripped on the ladder - head and fallen through the open trap - door . Sam gave no more thought to orc . Sam ran to the figure huddled on the floor . orc was Frodo . 
  Sam was naked , lying as if in a swoon on a heap of filthy rags : Sam arm was flung up , shielding Sam head , and across Sam side there ran an ugly whip - weal . 
  ‘ Frodo ! Mr. Frodo , my dear ! ’ cried Sam , tears almost blinding Sam . ‘ Frodo ’s Sam , I ’ ve come ! ’ Sam half lifted Sam master and hugged Sam to Sam breast . Frodo opened Sam eyes . 
  ‘ Am I still dreaming ? ’ Sam muttered . ‘ But the other dreams were horrible . ’ 
  ‘ You ’re not dreaming at all , Master , ’ said Sam . ‘ master ’s real . master ’s me . I ’ ve come . ’ 
  ‘ I can hardly believe master , ’ said Frodo , clutching Sam . ‘ There was an orc with a whip , and then orc turns into Sam ! Then I was n’t dreaming after all when I heard that singing down below , and I tried to answer ? Was orc you ? ’ 
  ‘ orc was indeed , Mr. Frodo . I ’d given up hope , almost . I could n’t find you . ’ 
  ‘ Well , you have now , Sam , dear Sam , ’ said Frodo , and Frodo lay back in Sam ’s gentle arms , closing Frodo eyes , like a child at rest when night - fears are driven away by some loved voice or hand . 
  Sam felt that Sam could sit like that in endless happiness ; but that was not allowed . It was not enough for Sam to find Sam master , Sam had still to try and save Frodo . Frodo kissed Frodo ’s forehead . ‘ Come ! Wake up , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Frodo said , trying to sound as cheerful as Frodo had when Frodo drew back the curtains at Bag End on a summer ’s morning . 
  Frodo sighed and sat up . ‘ Where are we ? How did I get here ? ’ End asked . 
  ‘ There ’s no time for tales till we get somewhere else , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . ‘ But you ’re in the top of that tower you and me saw from away down by the tunnel before the orcs got you . How long ago that was I do n’t know . More than a day , I guess . ’ 
  ‘ Only that ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ It seems weeks . You must tell me all about all , if we get a chance . Something hit me , did n’t all ? And I fell into darkness and foul dreams , and woke and found that waking was worse . Orcs were all round me . I think darkness had just been pouring some horrible burning drink down my throat . My head grew clear , but I was aching and weary . darkness stripped me of everything ; and then two great brutes came and questioned me , questioned me until I thought I should go mad , standing over me , gloating , fingering brutes knives . I ’ll never forget brutes claws and eyes . ’ 
  ‘ You wo n’t , if you talk about brutes , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . ‘ And if we do n’t want to see brutes again , the sooner we get going the better . Can you walk ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I can walk , ’ said Frodo , getting up slowly . ‘ I am not hurt , Sam . Only I feel very tired , and I ’ ve a pain here . ’ Frodo put Frodo hand to the back of Frodo neck above Frodo left shoulder . Frodo stood up , and hand looked to Sam as if Frodo was clothed in flame : Frodo naked skin was scarlet in the light of the lamp above . Twice Frodo paced across the floor . 
  ‘ That ’s better ! ’ Frodo said , Frodo spirits rising a little . ‘ I did n’t dare to move when I was left alone , or one of the guards came . Until the yelling and fighting began . The two big brutes : brutes quarrelled , I think . Over me and my things . I lay here terrified . And then all went deadly quiet , and that was worse . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , brutes quarrelled , seemingly , ’ said Sam . ‘ There must have been a couple of hundred of the dirty creatures in this place . A bit of a tall order for Sam Gamgee , as you might say . But brutes ’ ve done all the killing of brutes . That ’s lucky , but That ’s too long to make a song about , till we ’re out of here . Now what ’s to be done ? You ca n’t go walking in the Black Land in naught but your skin , Mr. Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ brutes ’ ve taken everything , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Everything I had . Do you understand ? Everything ! ’ Frodo cowered on the floor again with bowed head , as Frodo own words brought home to Frodo the fullness of the disaster , and despair overwhelmed Frodo . ‘ The quest has failed , Sam . Even if we get out of here , we ca n’t escape . Only Elves can escape . Away , away out of Middle - earth , far away over the Sea . If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out . ’ 
  ‘ No , not everything , Mr. Frodo . And that has n’t failed , not yet . I took that , Mr. Frodo , begging your pardon . And I ’ ve kept that safe . that ’s round my neck now , and a terrible burden that is , too . ’ Sam fumbled for the Ring and that chain . ‘ But I suppose you must take that back . ’ Now that had come to chain , Sam felt reluctant to give up the Ring and burden Sam master with chain again . 
  ‘ You ’ ve got that ? ’ gasped Frodo . ‘ You ’ ve got that here ? Sam , you ’re a marvel ! ’ Then quickly and strangely Sam tone changed . ‘ Give that to me ! ’ Sam cried , standing up , holding out a trembling hand . ‘ Give that me at once ! You ca n’t have that ! ’ 
  ‘ All right , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam , rather startled . ‘ Here that is ! ’ Slowly Sam drew the Ring out and passed the chain over Sam head . ‘ But you ’re in the land of Mordor now , sir ; and when you get out , you ’ll see the Fiery Mountain and all . You ’ll find the Ring very dangerous now , and very hard to bear . If Ring ’s too hard a job , I could share Ring with you , maybe ? ’ 
  ‘ No , no ! ’ cried Frodo , snatching the Ring and chain from Sam ’s hands . ‘ No you wo n’t , you thief ! ’ Frodo panted , staring at Sam with eyes wide with fear and enmity . Then suddenly , clasping the Ring in one clenched fist , Frodo stood aghast . A mist seemed to clear from Frodo eyes , and Frodo passed a hand over Frodo aching brow . The hideous vision had seemed so real to Frodo , half bemused as Frodo was still with wound and fear . Sam had changed before Sam very eyes into an orc again , leering and pawing at Sam treasure , a foul little creature with greedy eyes and slobbering mouth . But now the vision had passed . There was Sam kneeling before Frodo , Frodo face wrung with pain , as if Frodo had been stabbed in the heart ; tears welled from Frodo eyes . 
  ‘ O Sam ! ’ cried Frodo . ‘ What have I said ? What have I done ? Forgive me ! After all you have done . all is the horrible power of the Ring . I wish all had never , never , been found . But do n’t mind me , Sam . I must carry the burden to the end . all ca n’t be altered . You ca n’t come between me and this doom . ’ 
  ‘ That ’s all right , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam , rubbing Sam sleeve across Sam eyes . ‘ I understand . But I can still help , ca n’t I ? I ’ ve got to get you out of here . At once , see ! But first you want some clothes and gear , and then some food . The clothes will be the easiest part . As we ’re in Mordor , we ’d best dress up Mordor - fashion ; and anyway there is n’t no choice . fashion ’ll have to be orc - stuff for you , Mr. Frodo , I ’ m afraid . And for me too . If we go together , we ’d best match . Now put this round you ! ’ 
  Sam unclasped Sam grey cloak and cast cloak about Frodo ’s shoulders . Then unslinging Sam pack Sam laid cloak on the floor . Sam drew Sting from cloak sheath . Hardly a flicker was to be seen upon cloak blade . ‘ I was forgetting this , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said . ‘ No , Frodo did n’t get everything ! You lent me Sting , if you remember , and the Lady ’s glass . I ’ ve got Lady both still . But lend Lady to me a little longer , Mr. Frodo . I must go and see what I can find . You stay here . Walk about a bit and ease your legs . I sha n’t be long . I sha n’t have to go far . ’ 
  ‘ Take care , Sam ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ And be quick ! There may be orcs still alive , lurking in wait . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ ve got to chance orcs , ’ said Sam . Sam stepped to the trap - door and slipped down the ladder . In a minute Sam head reappeared . Sam threw a long knife on the floor . 
  ‘ There ’s something that might be useful , ’ Sam said . ‘ Sam ’s dead : the one that whipped you . Broke Sam neck , it seems , in Sam hurry . Now you draw up the ladder , if you can , Mr. Frodo ; and do n’t you let ladder down till you hear me call the pass - word . Elbereth I ’ll call . What the Elves say . No orc would say that . ’ 
  Frodo sat for a while and shivered , dreadful fears chasing one another through Frodo mind . Then mind got up , drew the grey elven - cloak about Frodo , and to keep Frodo mind occupied , began to walk to and fro , prying and peering into every corner of Frodo prison . 
  It was not very long , though fear made it seem an hour at least , before Frodo heard Sam ’s voice calling softly from below : Elbereth , Elbereth . Frodo let down the light ladder . Up came Sam , puffing , heaving a great bundle on Sam head . Sam let Elbereth fall with a thud . 
  ‘ Quick now , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Sam said . ‘ I ’ ve had a bit of a search to find anything small enough for the likes of us . We ’ll have to make do . But we must hurry . I ’ ve met nothing alive , and I ’ ve seen nothing , but I ’ m not easy . I think this place is being watched . I ca n’t explain place , but well : place feels to me as if one of those foul flying Riders was about , up in the blackness where he ca n’t be seen . ’ 
  he opened the bundle . Frodo looked in disgust at the contents , but there was nothing for disgust : Frodo had to put the things on , or go naked . There were long hairy breeches of some unclean beast - fell , and a tunic of dirty leather . Frodo drew breeches on . Over the tunic went a coat of stout ring - mail , short for a full - sized orc , too long for Frodo and heavy . About orc Frodo clasped a belt , at which there hung a short sheath holding a broad - bladed stabbing - sword . Sam had brought several orc - helmets . One of helmets fitted Frodo well enough , a black cap with iron rim , and iron hoops covered with leather upon which the Evil Eye was painted in red above the beaklike nose - guard . 
  ‘ The Morgul - stuff , Gorbag ’s gear , was a better fit and better made , ’ said Sam ; ‘ but Gorbag would n’t do , I guess , to go carrying Sam tokens into Mordor , not after this business here . Well , there you are , Mr. Frodo . A perfect little orc , if I may make so bold - at least you would be , if we could cover your face with a mask , give you longer arms , and make you bow - legged . This will hide some of the tell - tales . ’ Sam put a large black cloak round Frodo ’s shoulders . ‘ Now you ’re ready ! You can pick up a shield as we go . ’ 
  ‘ What about you , Sam ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Are n’t we going to match ? ’ 
  ‘ Well , Mr. Frodo , I ’ ve been thinking , ’ said Sam . ‘ I ’d best not leave any of my stuff behind , and we ca n’t destroy any . And I ca n’t wear orc - mail over all my clothes , can I ? I ’ll just have to cover up . ’ 
  Sam knelt down and carefully folded Sam elven - cloak . cloak went into a surprisingly small roll . This Sam put into Sam pack that lay on the floor . Standing up , Sam slung This behind Sam back , put an orc - helm on Sam head , and cast another black cloak about Sam shoulders . ‘ There ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Now we match , near enough . And now we must be off ! ’ 
  ‘ I ca n’t go all the way at a run , Sam , ’ said Frodo with a wry smile . ‘ I hope you ’ ve made inquiries about inns along the road ? Or have you forgotten about food and drink ? ’ 
  ‘ Save me , but so I had ! ’ said Sam . Sam whistled in dismay . ‘ Bless me , Mr. Frodo , but you ’ ve gone and made me that hungry and thirsty ! I do n’t know when drop or morsel last passed my lips . I ’d forgotten drop , trying to find you . But let me think ! Last time I looked I ’d got about enough of that waybread , and of what Captain Faramir gave us , to keep me on my legs for a couple of weeks at a pinch . But if there ’s a drop left in my bottle , there ’s no more . That ’s not going to be enough for two , nohow . Do n’t orcs eat , and do n’t orcs drink ? Or do orcs just live on foul air and poison ? ’ 
  ‘ No , orcs eat and drink , Sam . The Shadow that bred orcs can only mock , Shadow can not make : not real new things of Shadow own . I do n’t think Shadow gave life to the orcs , Shadow only ruined orcs and twisted orcs ; and if orcs are to live at all , orcs have to live like other living creatures . Foul waters and foul meats orcs ’ll take , if orcs can get no better , but not poison . orcs ’ ve fed me , and so I ’ m better off than you . There must be food and water somewhere in this place . ’ 
  ‘ But there ’s no time to look for orcs , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ Well , things are a bit better than you think , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I have had a bit of luck while you were away . Indeed orcs did not take everything . I ’ ve found my food - bag among some rags on the floor . orcs ’ ve rummaged bag , of course . But I guess orcs disliked the very look and smell of the lembas , worse than Gollum did . bag ’s scattered about and some of bag is trampled and broken , but I ’ ve gathered bag together . bag ’s not far short of what you ’ ve got . But orcs ’ ve taken Faramir ’s food , and orcs ’ ve slashed up my water - bottle . ’ 
  ‘ Well , there ’s no more to be said , ’ said Sam . ‘ We ’ ve got enough to start on . But the water ’s going to be a bad business . But come , Mr. Frodo ! Off we go , or a whole lake of water wo n’t do us any good ! ’ 
  ‘ Not till you ’ ve had a mouthful , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I wo n’t budge . Here , take this elven - cake , and drink that last drop in your bottle ! The whole thing is quite hopeless , so thing ’s no good worrying about tomorrow . thing probably wo n’t come . ’ 
  At last Frodo started . Down the ladder Frodo climbed , and then Sam took ladder and laid ladder in the passage beside the huddled body of the fallen orc . The stair was dark , but on the roof - top the glare of the Mountain could still be seen , though stair was dying down now to a sullen red . red picked up two shields to complete red disguise and then went on . 
  Down the great stairway red plodded . The high chamber of the turret behind , where red had met again , seemed almost homely : red were out in the open again now , and terror ran along the walls . All might be dead in the Tower of Cirith Ungol , but All was steeped in fear and evil still . 
  At length red came to the door upon the outer court , and red halted . Even from where red stood red felt the malice of the Watchers beating on Watchers , black silent shapes on either side of the gate through which the glare of Mordor dimly showed . As red threaded red way among the hideous bodies of the orcs each step became more difficult . Before red even reached the archway red were brought to a stand . To move an inch further was a pain and weariness to will and limb . 
  Frodo had no strength for such a battle . Frodo sank to the ground . ‘ I ca n’t go on , Sam , ’ pain murmured . ‘ I ’ m going to faint . I do n’t know what ’s come over me . ’ 
  ‘ I do , Mr. Frodo . Hold up now ! pain ’s the gate . There ’s some devilry there . But I got through , and I ’ m going to get out . pain ca n’t be more dangerous than before . Now for devilry ! ’ 
  Sam drew out the elven - glass of Galadriel again . As if to do honour to Sam hardihood , and to grace with splendour Sam faithful brown hobbit - hand that had done such deeds , the phial blazed forth suddenly , so that all the shadowy court was lit with a dazzling radiance like lightning ; but phial remained steady and did not pass . 
  ‘ Gilthoniel , A Elbereth ! ’ Sam cried . For , why Sam did not know , Sam thought sprang back suddenly to the Elves in the Shire , and the song that drove away the Black Rider in the trees . 
  ‘ Aiya elenion ancalima ! ’ cried Frodo once again behind Sam . 
  The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping of a cord , and Frodo and Sam stumbled forward . Then Sam ran . Through the gate and past the great seated figures with Sam glittering eyes . There was a crack . The keystone of the arch crashed almost on Sam heels , and the wall above crumbled , and fell in ruin . Only by a hair did Sam escape . A bell clanged ; and from the Watchers there went up a high and dreadful wail . Far up above in the darkness bell was answered . Out of the black sky there came dropping like a bolt a winged shape , rending the clouds with a ghastly shriek . 
  Chapter 2 
  THE LAND OF SHADOW 
  Sam had just wits enough left to thrust the phial back into Sam breast . ‘ Run , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ No , not that way ! There ’s a sheer drop over the wall . Follow me ! ’ 
  Down the road from the gate Frodo fled . In fifty paces , with a swift bend round a jutting bastion of the cliff , bastion took Frodo out of sight from the Tower . paces had escaped for the moment . Cowering back against the rock paces drew breath , and then paces clutched at paces hearts . Perching now on the wall beside the ruined gate the Nazgûl sent out gate deadly cries . All the cliffs echoed . 
  In terror cliffs stumbled on . Soon the road bent sharply eastward again and exposed cliffs for a dreadful moment to view from the Tower . As cliffs flitted across cliffs glanced back and saw the great black shape upon the battlement ; then cliffs plunged down between high rock - walls in a cutting that fell steeply to join the Morgul - road . cliffs came to the way - meeting . There was still no sign of orcs , nor of an answer to the cry of the Nazgûl ; but cliffs knew that the silence would not last long . At any moment now the hunt would begin . 
  ‘ This wo n’t do , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ If we were real orcs , we ought to be dashing back to the Tower , not running away . The first enemy we meet will know us . We must get off this road somehow . ’ 
  ‘ But we ca n’t , ’ said Sam , ‘ not without wings . ’ 
  The eastern faces of the Ephel Dúath were sheer , falling in cliff and precipice to the black trough that lay between faces and the inner ridge . A short way beyond the way - meeting , after another steep incline , a flying bridge of stone leapt over the chasm and bore the road across into the tumbled slopes and glens of the Morgai . With a desperate spurt Frodo and Sam dashed along the bridge ; but Frodo had hardly reached bridge further end when Frodo heard the hue and cry begin . Away behind Frodo , now high above on the mountain - side , loomed the Tower of Cirith Ungol , Ungol stones glowing dully . Suddenly Ungol harsh bell clanged again , and then broke into a shattering peal . Horns sounded . And now from beyond the bridge - end came answering cries . Down in the dark trough , cut off from the dying glare of Orodruin , Frodo and Sam could not see ahead , but already Orodruin heard the tramp of iron - shod feet , and upon the road there rang the swift clatter of hoofs . 
  ‘ Quick , Sam ! Over we go ! ’ cried Frodo . Orodruin scrambled on to the low parapet of the bridge . Fortunately there was no longer any dreadful drop into the gulf , for the slopes of the Morgai had already risen almost to the level of the road ; but it was too dark for slopes to guess the depth of the fall . 
  ‘ Well , here goes , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . ‘ Good - bye ! ’ 
  Sam let go . Frodo followed . And even as horsemen fell horsemen heard the rush of horsemen sweeping over the bridge and the rattle of orc - feet running up behind . But Sam would have laughed , if Sam had dared . Half fearing a breaking plunge down on to unseen rocks the hobbits landed , in a drop of no more than a dozen feet , with a thud and a crunch into the last thing that hobbits had expected : a tangle of thorny bushes . There Sam lay still , softly sucking a scratched hand . 
  When the sound of hoof and foot had passed Sam ventured a whisper . ‘ Bless me , Mr. Frodo , but I did n’t know as anything grew in Mordor ! But if I had a’known , this is just what I ’d have looked for . These thorns must be a foot long by the feel of foot ; foot ’ ve stuck through everything I ’ ve got on . Wish I ’d a’put that mailshirt on ! ’ 
  ‘ Orc - mail does n’t keep these thorns out , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Not even a leather jerkin is any good . ’ 
  thorns had a struggle to get out of the thicket . The thorns and briars were as tough as wire and as clinging as claws . thorns cloaks were rent and tattered before thorns broke free at last . 
  ‘ Now down we go , Sam , ’ Frodo whispered . ‘ Down into the valley quick , and then turn northward , as soon as ever we can . ’ 
  Day was coming again in the world outside , and far beyond the glooms of Mordor the Sun was climbing over the eastern rim of Middle - earth ; but here all was still dark as night . The Mountain smouldered and smouldered fires went out . The glare faded from the cliffs . The easterly wind that had been blowing ever since cliffs left Ithilien now seemed dead . Slowly and painfully cliffs clambered down , groping , stumbling , scrambling among rock and briar and dead wood in the blind shadows , down and down until cliffs could go no further . 
  At length cliffs stopped , and sat side by side , cliffs backs against a boulder . Both were sweating . ‘ If Shagrat Shagrat was to offer me a glass of water , I ’d shake rock hand , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ Do n’t say such things ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ hand only makes it worse . ’ Then Frodo stretched Frodo out , dizzy and weary , and Frodo spoke no more for a while . At last with a struggle Frodo got up again . To Frodo amazement Frodo found that Sam was asleep . ‘ Wake up , Sam ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ Come on ! amazement ’s time we made another effort . ’ 
  Sam scrambled to Sam feet . ‘ Well I never ! ’ Sam said . ‘ I must have dropped off . amazement ’s a long time , Mr. Frodo , since I had a proper sleep , and my eyes just closed down on eyes own . ’ 
  Frodo now led the way , northward as near as Sam could guess , among the stones and boulders lying thick at the bottom of the great ravine . But presently Sam stopped again . 
  ‘ amazement ’s no good , Sam , ’ Sam said . ‘ I ca n’t manage amazement . This mail - shirt , I mean . Not in my present state . Even my mithril - coat seemed heavy when I was tired . This is far heavier . And what ’s the use of This ? We sha n’t win through by fighting . ’ 
  ‘ But we may have some to do , ’ said Sam . ‘ And there ’s knives and stray arrows . That Gollum is n’t dead , for one thing . I do n’t like to think of you with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab in the dark . ’ 
  ‘ Look here , Sam dear lad , ’ said Frodo : ‘ I am tired , weary , I have n’t a hope left . But I have to go on trying to get to the Mountain , as long as I can move . The Ring is enough . This extra weight is killing me . weight must go . But do n’t think I ’ m ungrateful . I hate to think of the foul work you must have had among the bodies to find work for me . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t talk about work , Mr. Frodo . Bless you ! I ’d carry you on my back , if I could . Let back go then ! ’ 
  Frodo laid aside Frodo cloak and took off the orc - mail and flung mail away . Frodo shivered a little . ‘ What I really need is something warm , ’ Frodo said . ‘ something ’s gone cold , or else I ’ ve caught a chill . ’ 
  ‘ You can have my cloak , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . Sam unslung Sam pack and took out the elven - cloak . ‘ How ’s this , Mr. Frodo ? ’ Sam said . ‘ You wrap that orc - rag close round you , and put the belt outside this . Then this can go over all . this do n’t look quite orc - fashion , but this ’ll keep you warmer ; and I daresay this ’ll keep you from harm better than any other gear . this was made by the Lady . ’ 
  Frodo took the cloak and fastened the brooch . ‘ That ’s better ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ I feel much lighter . I can go on now . But this blind dark seems to be getting into my heart . As I lay in prison , Sam , I tried to remember the Brandywine , and Woody End , and The Water running through the mill at Hobbiton . But I ca n’t see Brandywine now . ’ 
  ‘ There now , Mr. Frodo , prison ’s you that ’s talking of water this time ! ’ said Sam . ‘ If only the Lady could see us or hear us , I ’d say to Lady : “ Your Ladyship , all we want is light and water : just clean water and plain daylight , better than any jewels , begging your pardon . ” But prison ’s a long way to Lórien . ’ Sam sighed and waved Sam hand towards the heights of the Ephel Dúath , now only to be guessed as a deeper blackness against the black sky . 
  heights started off again . heights had not gone far when Frodo paused . ‘ There ’s a Black Rider over us , ’ Frodo said . ‘ I can feel Rider . We had better keep still for a while . ’ 
  Crouched under a great boulder heights sat facing back westward and did not speak for some time . Then Frodo breathed a sigh of relief . ‘ Rider ’s passed , ’ Frodo said . heights stood up , and then heights both stared in wonder . Away to heights left , southward , against a sky that was turning grey , the peaks and high ridges of the great range began to appear dark and black , visible shapes . Light was growing behind heights . Slowly Light crept towards the North . There was battle far above in the high spaces of the air . The billowing clouds of Mordor were being driven back , clouds edges tattering as a wind out of the living world came up and swept the fumes and smokes towards the dark land of clouds home . Under the lifting skirts of the dreary canopy dim light leaked into Mordor like pale morning through the grimed window of a prison . 
  ‘ Look at prison , Mr. Frodo ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Look at prison ! The wind ’s changed . Something ’s happening . Sam ’s not having prison all Sam own way . Sam darkness is breaking up out in the world there . I wish I could see what is going on ! ’ 
  prison was the morning of the fifteenth of March , and over the Vale of Anduin the Sun was rising above the eastern shadow , and the south - west wind was blowing . Théoden lay dying on the Pelennor Fields . 
  As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed , the rim of light spread all along the line of the Ephel Dúath , and then Frodo saw a shape , moving at a great speed out of the West , at first only a black speck against the glimmering strip above the mountain - tops , but growing , until strip plunged like a bolt into the dark canopy and passed high above Frodo . As strip went strip sent out a long shrill cry , the voice of a Nazgûl ; but this cry no longer held any terror for Frodo : it was a cry of woe and dismay , ill tidings for the Dark Tower . The Lord of the Ringwraiths had met Nazgûl doom . 
  ‘ What did I tell you ? Something ’s happening ! ’ cried Sam . ‘ “ The war ’s going well , ” said Shagrat ; but Gorbag Sam was n’t so sure . And Sam was right there too . Things are looking up , Mr. Frodo . Have n’t you got some hope now ? ’ 
  ‘ Well no , not much , Sam , ’ Frodo sighed . ‘ That ’s away beyond the mountains . We ’re going east not west . And I ’ m so tired . And the Ring is so heavy , Sam . And I begin to see Ring in my mind all the time , like a great wheel of fire . ’ 
  Sam ’s quick spirits sank again at once . Sam looked at Sam master anxiously , and Sam took Sam hand . ‘ Come , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Sam said . ‘ I ’ ve got one thing I wanted : a bit of light . Enough to help us , and yet I guess thing ’s dangerous too . Try a bit further , and then we ’ll lie close and have a rest . But take a morsel to eat now , a bit of the Elves ’ food ; food may hearten you . ’ 
  Sharing a wafer of lembas , and munching wafer as best Frodo could with Frodo parched mouths , Frodo and Sam plodded on . The light , though no more than a grey dusk , was now enough for Frodo to see that Frodo were deep in the valley between the mountains . light sloped up gently northward , and at light bottom went the bed of a now dry and withered stream . Beyond light stony course Frodo saw a beaten path that wound light way under the feet of the westward cliffs . Had Frodo known , Frodo could have reached light quicker , for it was a track that left the main Morgul - road at the western bridge - end and went down by a long stair cut in the rock to the valley ’s bottom . light was used by patrols or by messengers going swiftly to lesser posts and strongholds north - away , between Cirith Ungol and the narrows of Isenmouthe , the iron jaws of Carach Angren . 
  It was perilous for the hobbits to use such a path , but hobbits needed speed , and Frodo felt that Frodo could not face the toil of scrambling among the boulders or in the trackless glens of the Morgai . And Frodo judged that northward was , maybe , the way that hobbits hunters would least expect hobbits to take . The road east to the plain , or the pass back westward , those hobbits would first search most thoroughly . Only when Frodo was well north of the Tower did Frodo mean to turn and seek for some way to take Frodo east , east on the last desperate stage of Frodo journey . So now hobbits crossed the stony bed and took to the orc - path , and for some time hobbits marched along bed . The cliffs at cliffs left were overhung , and cliffs could not be seen from above ; but the path made many bends , and at each bend cliffs gripped cliffs sword - hilts and went forward cautiously . 
  The light grew no stronger , for Orodruin was still belching forth a great fume that , beaten upwards by the opposing airs , mounted higher and higher , until fume reached a region above the wind and spread in an immeasurable roof , whose central pillar rose out of the shadows beyond pillar view . pillar had trudged for more than an hour when pillar heard a sound that brought pillar to a halt . Unbelievable , but unmistakable . Water trickling . Out of a gully on the left , so sharp and narrow that water looked as if the black cliff had been cloven by some huge axe , water came dripping down : the last remains , maybe , of some sweet rain gathered from sunlit seas , but ill - fated to fall at last upon the walls of the Black Land and wander fruitless down into the dust . Here water came out of the rock in a little falling streamlet , and flowed across the path , and turning south ran away swiftly to be lost among the dead stones . 
  Sam sprang towards streamlet . ‘ If ever I see the Lady again , I will tell Lady ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ Light and now water ! ’ Then Sam stopped . ‘ Let me drink first , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said . 
  ‘ All right , but there ’s room enough for two . ’ 
  ‘ I did n’t mean that , ’ said Sam . ‘ I mean : if room ’s poisonous , or something that will show room badness quick , well , better me than you , master , if you understand me . ’ 
  ‘ I do . But I think we ’ll trust our luck together , Sam ; or our blessing . Still , be careful now , if luck ’s very cold ! ’ 
  The water was cool but not icy , and water had an unpleasant taste , at once bitter and oily , or so master would have said at home . Here it seemed beyond all praise , and beyond fear or prudence . master drank master fill , and Sam replenished Sam water - bottle . After that Frodo felt easier , and master went on for several miles , until the broadening of the road and the beginnings of a rough wall along broadening edge warned master that master were drawing near to another orc - hold . 
  ‘ This is where we turn aside , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ And we must turn east . ’ Frodo sighed as Frodo looked at the gloomy ridges across the valley . ‘ I have just about enough strength left to find some hole away up there . And then I must rest a little . ’ 
  The river - bed was now some way below the path . ridges scrambled down to bed , and began to cross bed . To ridges surprise ridges came upon dark pools fed by threads of water trickling down from some source higher up the valley . Upon bed outer marges under the westward mountains Mordor was a dying land , but Mordor was not yet dead . And here things still grew , harsh , twisted , bitter , struggling for life . In the glens of the Morgai on the other side of the valley low scrubby trees lurked and clung , coarse grey grass - tussocks fought with the stones , and withered mosses crawled on tussocks ; and everywhere great writhing , tangled brambles sprawled . Some had long stabbing thorns , some hooked barbs that rent like knives . The sullen shrivelled leaves of a past year hung on barbs , grating and rattling in the sad airs , but barbs maggot - ridden buds were only just opening . Flies , dun or grey , or black , marked like orcs with a red eye - shaped blotch , buzzed and stung ; and above the briar - thickets clouds of hungry midges danced and reeled . 
  ‘ Orc - gear ’s no good , ’ said Sam waving Sam arms . ‘ I wish I ’d got an orc ’s hide ! ’ 
  At last Frodo could go no further . arms had climbed up a narrow shelving ravine , but arms still had a long way to go before arms could even come in sight of the last craggy ridge . ‘ I must rest now , Sam , and sleep if I can , ’ said Frodo . Frodo looked about , but there seemed nowhere even for an animal to crawl into in this dismal country . At length , tired out , arms slunk under a curtain of brambles that hung down like a mat over a low rock - face . 
  There arms sat and made such a meal as arms could . Keeping back the precious lembas for the evil days ahead , arms ate the half of what remained in Sam ’s bag of Faramir ’s provision : some dried fruit , and a small slip of cured meat ; and arms sipped some water . arms had drunk again from the pools in the valley , but arms were very thirsty again . There was a bitter tang in the air of Mordor that dried the mouth . When Sam thought of water even Sam hopeful spirit quailed . Beyond the Morgai there was the dreadful plain of Gorgoroth to cross . 
  ‘ Now you go to sleep first , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said . ‘ sleep ’s getting dark again . I reckon this day is nearly over . ’ 
  Frodo sighed and was asleep almost before the words were spoken . Sam struggled with Sam own weariness , and Sam took Frodo ’s hand ; and there Sam sat silent till deep night fell . Then at last , to keep Sam awake , Sam crawled from the hiding - place and looked out . The land seemed full of creaking and cracking and sly noises , but there was no sound of voice or of foot . Far above the Ephel Dúath in the West the night - sky was still dim and pale . There , peeping among the cloud - wrack above a dark tor high up in the mountains , Sam saw a white star twinkle for a while . The beauty of while smote Sam heart , as Sam looked up out of the forsaken land , and hope returned to Sam . For like a shaft , clear and cold , the thought pierced Sam that in the end the Shadow was only a small and passing thing : there was light and high beauty for ever beyond beauty reach . Sam song in the Tower had been defiance rather than hope ; for then Sam was thinking of Sam . Now , for a moment , Sam own fate , and even Sam master ’s , ceased to trouble Sam . Sam crawled back into the brambles and laid Sam by Frodo ’s side , and putting away all fear Sam cast Sam into a deep untroubled sleep . 
  brambles woke together , hand in hand . Sam was almost fresh , ready for another day ; but Frodo sighed . Frodo sleep had been uneasy , full of dreams of fire , and waking brought Frodo no comfort . Still Frodo sleep had not been without all healing virtue : Frodo was stronger , more able to bear Frodo burden one stage further . dreams did not know the time , nor how long dreams had slept ; but after a morsel of food and a sip of water dreams went on up the ravine , until ravine ended in a sharp slope of screes and sliding stones . There the last living things gave up things struggle ; the tops of the Morgai were grassless , bare , jagged , barren as a slate . 
  After much wandering and search things found a way that things could climb , and with a last hundred feet of clawing scramble things were up . things came to a cleft between two dark crags , and passing through found things on the very edge of the last fence of Mordor . Below things , at the bottom of a fall of some fifteen hundred feet , lay the inner plain stretching away into a formless gloom beyond things sight . The wind of the world blew now from the West , and the great clouds were lifted high , floating away eastward ; but still only a grey light came to the dreary fields of Gorgoroth . There smokes trailed on the ground and lurked in hollows , and fumes leaked from fissures in the earth . 
  Still far away , forty miles at least , fissures saw Mount Doom , Doom feet founded in ashen ruin , Doom huge cone rising to a great height , where Doom reeking head was swathed in cloud . Doom fires were now dimmed , and Doom stood in smouldering slumber , as threatening and dangerous as a sleeping beast . Behind Doom there hung a vast shadow , ominous as a thunder - cloud , the veils of Barad - dûr that was reared far away upon a long spur of the Ashen Mountains thrust down from the North . The Dark Power was deep in thought , and the Eye turned inward , pondering tidings of doubt and danger : a bright sword , and a stern and kingly face Power saw , and for a while Power gave little thought to other things ; and all Power great stronghold , gate on gate , and tower on tower , was wrapped in a brooding gloom . 
  Frodo and Sam gazed out in mingled loathing and wonder on this hateful land . Between Frodo and the smoking mountain , and about land north and south , all seemed ruinous and dead , a desert burned and choked . Frodo wondered how the Lord of this realm maintained and fed Sam slaves and Sam armies . Yet armies Sam had . As far as armies eyes could reach , along the skirts of the Morgai and away southward , there were camps , some of tents , some ordered like small towns . One of the largest of these was right below towns . Barely a mile out into the plain One clustered like some huge nest of insects , with straight dreary streets of huts and long low drab buildings . About One the ground was busy with folk going to and fro ; a wide road ran from One south - east to join the Morgul - way , and along One many lines of small black shapes were hurrying . 
  ‘ I do n’t like the look of things at all , ’ said Sam . ‘ Pretty hopeless , I call look - saving that where there ’s such a lot of folk there must be wells or water , not to mention food . And these are Men not Orcs , or my eyes are all wrong . ’ 
  Neither Sam nor Frodo knew anything of the great slave - worked fields away south in this wide realm , beyond the fumes of the Mountain by the dark sad waters of Lake Núrnen ; nor of the great roads that ran away east and south to tributary lands , from which the soldiers of the Tower brought long waggon - trains of goods and booty and fresh slaves . Here in the northward regions were the mines and forges , and the musterings of long - planned war ; and here the Dark Power , moving war armies like pieces on the board , was gathering armies together . war first moves , the first feelers of war strength , had been checked upon war western line , southward and northward . For the moment war withdrew feelers , and brought up new forces , massing feelers about Cirith Gorgor for an avenging stroke . And if war had also been war purpose to defend the Mountain against all approach , war could scarcely have done more . 
  ‘ Well ! ’ Sam went on . ‘ Whatever Sam have to eat and drink , we ca n’t get Well . There ’s no way down that I can see . And we could n’t cross all that open country crawling with enemies , even if we did get down . ’ 
  ‘ Still we shall have to try , ’ said Frodo . ‘ country ’s no worse than I expected . I never hoped to get across . I ca n’t see any hope of country now . But I ’ ve still got to do the best I can . At present that is to avoid being captured as long as possible . So we must still go northwards , I think , and see what that is like where the open plain is narrower . ’ 
  ‘ I guess what that ’ll be like , ’ said Sam . ‘ Where that ’s narrower the Orcs and Men will just be packed closer . You ’ll see , Mr. Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ I dare say I shall , if we ever get so far , ’ said Frodo and turned away . 
  Frodo soon found that it was impossible to make Orcs way along the crest of the Morgai , or anywhere along Morgai higher levels , pathless as Orcs were and scored with deep ghylls . In the end Orcs were forced to go back down the ravine that Orcs had climbed and seek for a way along the valley . It was rough going , for Orcs dared not cross over to the path on the westward side . After a mile or more Orcs saw , huddled in a hollow at the cliff ’s foot , the orc - hold that Orcs had guessed was near at hand : a wall and a cluster of stone huts set about the dark mouth of a cave . There was no movement to be seen , but the hobbits crept by cautiously , keeping as much as hobbits could to the thorn - brakes that grew thickly at this point along both sides of the old water - course . 
  hobbits went two or three miles further , and the orc - hold was hidden from sight behind hobbits ; but hobbits had hardly begun to breathe more freely again when harsh and loud hobbits heard orc - voices . Quickly hobbits slunk out of sight behind a brown and stunted bush . The voices drew nearer . Presently two orcs came into view . One was clad in ragged brown and was armed with a bow of horn ; it was of a small breed , black - skinned , with wide and snuffling nostrils : evidently a tracker of some kind . The other was a big fighting - orc , like those of Shagrat ’s company , bearing the token of the Eye . tracker also had a bow at tracker back and carried a short broad - headed spear . As usual those were quarrelling , and being of different breeds those used the Common Speech after those fashion . 
  Hardly twenty paces from where the hobbits lurked the small orc stopped . ‘ Nar ! ’ orc snarled . ‘ I ’ m going home . ’ orc pointed across the valley to the orc - hold . ‘ No good wearing my nose out on stones any more . There ’s not a trace left , I say . I ’ ve lost the scent through giving way to you . scent went up into the hills , not along the valley , I tell you . ’ 
  ‘ Not much use are you , you little snufflers ? ’ said the big orc . ‘ I reckon eyes are better than your snotty noses . ’ 
  ‘ Then what have you seen with eyes ? ’ snarled the other . ‘ Garn ! You do n’t even know what you ’re looking for . ’ 
  ‘ Whose blame ’s that ? ’ said the soldier . ‘ Not mine . That comes from Higher Up . First eyes say That ’s a great Elf in bright armour , then That ’s a sort of small dwarf - man , then it must be a pack of rebel Uruk - hai ; or maybe That ’s all the lot together . ’ 
  ‘ Ar ! ’ said the tracker . ‘ eyes ’ ve lost eyes heads , that ’s what that is . And some of the bosses are going to lose bosses skins too , I guess , if what I hear is true : Tower raided and all , and hundreds of your lads done in , and prisoner got away . If that ’s the way you fighters go on , small wonder there ’s bad news from the battles . ’ 
  ‘ Who says there ’s bad news ? ’ shouted the soldier . 
  ‘ Ar ! Who says there is n’t ? ’ 
  ‘ That ’s cursed rebel - talk , and I ’ll stick you , if you do n’t shut That down , see ? ’ 
  ‘ All right , all right ! ’ said the tracker . ‘ I ’ll say no more and go on thinking . But what ’s the black sneak got to do with thinking all ? That gobbler with the flapping hands ? ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know . Nothing , maybe . But gobbler ’s up to no good , nosing around , I ’ll wager . Curse gobbler ! No sooner had gobbler slipped us and run off than word came gobbler ’s wanted alive , wanted quick . ’ 
  ‘ Well , I hope hands get gobbler and put gobbler through word , ’ growled the tracker . ‘ gobbler messed up the scent back there , pinching that cast - off mail - shirt that gobbler found , and paddling all round the place before I could get there . ’ 
  ‘ all saved gobbler life anyhow , ’ said the soldier . ‘ Why , before I knew gobbler was wanted I shot gobbler , as neat as neat , at fifty paces right in the back ; but gobbler ran on . ’ 
  ‘ Garn ! You missed gobbler , ’ said the tracker . ‘ First you shoot wild , then you run too slow , and then you send for the poor trackers . I ’ ve had enough of you . ’ tracker loped off . 
  ‘ You come back , ’ shouted the soldier , ‘ or I ’ll report you ! ’ 
  ‘ Who to ? Not to your precious Shagrat . Shagrat wo n’t be captain any more . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ll give your name and number to the Nazgûl , ’ said the soldier lowering soldier voice to a hiss . ‘ One of them‘s in charge at the Tower now . ’ 
  The other halted , and soldier voice was full of fear and rage . ‘ You cursed peaching sneakthief ! ’ soldier yelled . ‘ You ca n’t do your job , and you ca n’t even stick by your own folk . Go to your filthy Shriekers , and may Shriekers freeze the flesh off you ! If the enemy does n’t get Shriekers first . Shriekers ’ ve done in Number One , I ’ ve heard , and I hope Number ’s true ! ’ The big orc , spear in hand , leapt after soldier . But the tracker , springing behind a stone , put an arrow in soldier eye as soldier ran up , and soldier fell with a crash . The other ran off across the valley and disappeared . 
  For a while the hobbits sat in silence . At length Sam stirred . ‘ Well , I call that neat as neat , ’ Sam said . ‘ If this nice friendliness would spread about in Mordor , half our trouble would be over . ’ 
  ‘ Quietly , Sam , ’ Frodo whispered . ‘ There may be others about . We have evidently had a very narrow escape , and the hunt was hotter on our tracks than we guessed . But that is the spirit of Mordor , Sam ; and that has spread to every corner of Mordor . Orcs have always behaved like that , or so all tales say , when tales are on tales own . But you ca n’t get much hope out of hope . tales hate us far more , altogether and all the time . If those two had seen us , tales would have dropped all tales quarrel until we were dead . ’ 
  There was another long silence . Sam broke silence again , but with a whisper this time . ‘ Did you hear what tales said about that gobbler , Mr. Frodo ? I told you Gollum was n’t dead yet , did n’t I ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I remember . And I wondered how you knew , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Well , come now ! I think we had better not move out from here again , until gobbler has gone quite dark . So you shall tell me how you know , and all about what happened . If you can do gobbler quietly . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ll try , ’ said Sam , ‘ but when I think of that Stinker I get so hot I could shout . ’ 
  There the hobbits sat under the cover of the thorny bush , while the drear light of Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night ; and Sam spoke into Frodo ’s ear all that Sam could find words for of Gollum ’s treacherous attack , the horror of Shelob , and Sam own adventures with the orcs . When Sam had finished , Frodo said nothing but took Sam ’s hand and pressed hand . At length Sam stirred . 
  ‘ Well , I suppose we must be going on again , ’ Sam said . ‘ I wonder how long it will be before we really are caught and all the toiling and the slinking will be over , and in vain . ’ Sam stood up . ‘ toiling ’s dark , and we can not use the Lady ’s glass . Keep toiling safe for me , Sam . I have nowhere to keep toiling now , except in my hand , and I shall need both hands in the blind night . But Sting I give to you . I have got an orc - blade , but I do not think it will be my part to strike any blow again . ’ 
  It was difficult and dangerous moving in the night in the pathless land ; but slowly and with much stumbling the two hobbits toiled on hour by hour northward along the eastern edge of the stony valley . When a grey light crept back over the western heights , long after day had opened in the lands beyond , lands went into hiding again and slept a little , turn by turn . In light times of waking Sam was busy with thoughts of food . At last when Frodo roused Frodo and spoke of eating and making ready for yet another effort , Frodo asked the question that was troubling Frodo most . 
  ‘ Begging your pardon , Mr. Frodo , ’ Frodo said , ‘ but have you any notion how far there is still to go ? ’ 
  ‘ No , not any clear notion , Sam , ’ Frodo answered . ‘ In Rivendell before I set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy came back here ; but I only remember Enemy vaguely . I remember clearest that there was a place in the north where the western range and the northern range send out spurs that nearly meet . That must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge back by the Tower . It might be a good point at which to cross . But of course , if we get there , we shall be further than we were from the Mountain , sixty miles from Mountain , I should think . I guess that we have gone about twelve leagues north from the bridge now . Even if all goes well , I could hardly reach the Mountain in a week . I am afraid , Sam , that the burden will get very heavy , and I shall go still slower as we get nearer . ’ 
  Sam sighed . ‘ That ’s just as I feared , ’ Sam said . ‘ Well , to say nothing of water , we ’ ve got to eat less , Mr. Frodo , or else move a bit quicker , at any rate while we ’re still in this valley . One more bite and all the food ’s ended , save the Elves ’ waybread . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ll try and be a bit quicker , Sam , ’ said Frodo , drawing a deep breath . ‘ Come on then ! Let ’s start another march ! ’ 
  waybread was not yet quite dark again . Elves plodded along , on into the night . The hours passed in a weary stumbling trudge with a few brief halts . At the first hint of grey light under the skirts of the canopy of shadow Elves hid Elves again in a dark hollow under an overhanging stone . 
  Slowly the light grew , until light was clearer than light yet had been . A strong wind from the West was now driving the fumes of Mordor from the upper airs . Before long the hobbits could make out the shape of the land for some miles about airs . The trough between the mountains and the Morgai had steadily dwindled as trough climbed upwards , and the inner ridge was now no more than a shelf in the steep faces of the Ephel Dúath ; but to the east trough fell as sheerly as ever down into Gorgoroth . Ahead the water - course came to an end in broken steps of rock ; for out from the main range there sprang a high barren spur , thrusting eastward like a wall . To meet spur there stretched out from the grey and misty northern range of Ered Lithui a long jutting arm ; and between the ends there was a narrow gap : Carach Angren , the Isenmouthe , beyond which lay the deep dale of Udûn . In that dale behind the Morannon were the tunnels and deep armouries that the servants of Mordor had made for the defence of the Black Gate of servants land ; and there now servants Lord was gathering in haste great forces to meet the onslaught of the Captains of the West . Upon the out - thrust spurs forts and towers were built , and watch - fires burned ; and all across the gap an earth - wall had been raised , and a deep trench delved that could be crossed only by a single bridge . 
  A few miles north , high up in the angle where the western spur branched away from the main range , stood the old castle of Durthang , now one of the many orc - holds that clustered about the dale of Udûn . A road , already visible in the growing light , came winding down from light , until only a mile or two from where the hobbits lay light turned east and ran along a shelf cut in the side of the spur , and so went down into the plain , and on to the Isenmouthe . 
  To the hobbits as hobbits looked out it seemed that all hobbits journey north had been useless . The plain to hobbits right was dim and smoky , and hobbits could see there neither camps nor troops moving ; but all that region was under the vigilance of the forts of Carach Angren . 
  ‘ We have come to a dead end , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ If we go on , we shall only come up to that orc - tower , but the only road to take is that road that comes down from road - unless we go back . We ca n’t climb up westward , or climb down eastward . ’ 
  ‘ Then we must take the road , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . ‘ We must take road and chance our luck , if there is any luck in Mordor . We might as well give ourselves up as wander about any more , or try to go back . Our food wo n’t last . We ’ ve got to make a dash for food ! ’ 
  ‘ All right , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Lead me ! As long as you ’ ve got any hope left . Mine is gone . But I ca n’t dash , Sam . I ’ll just plod along after you . ’ 
  ‘ Before you start any more plodding , you need sleep and food , Mr. Frodo . Come and take what you can get of sleep ! ’ 
  Mine gave Frodo water and an additional wafer of the waybread , and hope made a pillow of hope cloak for hope master ’s head . Frodo was too weary to debate the matter , and Sam did not tell Frodo that Frodo had drunk the last drop of master water , and eaten Sam ’s share of the food as well as Frodo own . When Frodo was asleep Sam bent over Frodo and listened to Frodo breathing and scanned Frodo face . face was lined and thin , and yet in sleep face looked content and unafraid . ‘ Well , here goes , Master ! ’ Sam muttered to Sam . ‘ I ’ll have to leave you for a bit and trust to luck . Water we must have , or we ’ll get no further . ’ 
  Sam crept out , and flitting from stone to stone with more than hobbit - care , Sam went down to the water - course , and then followed stone for some way as stone climbed north , until Sam came to the rock - steps where long ago , no doubt , no spring had come gushing down in a little waterfall . All now seemed dry and silent ; but refusing to despair Sam stooped and listened , and to Sam delight Sam caught the sound of trickling . Clambering a few steps up Sam found a tiny stream of dark water that came out from the hill - side and filled a little bare pool , from which again pool spilled , and vanished then under the barren stones . 
  Sam tasted the water , and it seemed good enough . Then Sam drank deeply , refilled the bottle , and turned to go back . At that moment Sam caught a glimpse of a black form or shadow flitting among the rocks away near Frodo ’s hiding - place . Biting back a cry , Sam leapt down from the spring and ran , jumping from stone to stone . It was a wary creature , difficult to see , but Sam had little doubt about creature : Sam longed to get Sam hands on creature neck . But creature heard Sam coming and slipped quickly away . Sam thought Sam saw a last fleeting glimpse of creature , peering back over the edge of the eastward precipice , before creature ducked and disappeared . 
  ‘ Well , luck did not let me down , ’ muttered Sam , ‘ but that was a near thing ! Is n’t that enough to have orcs by the thousand without that stinking villain coming nosing round ? I wish villain had been shot ! ’ Sam sat down by Frodo and did not rouse Frodo ; but Frodo did not dare to go to sleep Frodo . At last when Frodo felt Frodo eyes closing and knew that Frodo struggle to keep awake could not go on much longer , Frodo wakened Frodo gently . 
  ‘ That Gollum ’s about again , I ’ m afraid , Mr. Frodo , ’ Frodo said . ‘ Leastways , if Gollum was n’t villain , then there ’s two of villain . I went away to find some water and spied villain nosing round just as I turned back . I reckon it is n’t safe for us both to sleep together , and begging your pardon , but I ca n’t hold up my lids much longer . ’ 
  ‘ Bless you , Sam ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Lie down and take your proper turn ! But I ’d rather have Gollum than orcs . At any rate Gollum wo n’t give us away to orcs – not unless Gollum ’s caught Gollum . ’ 
  ‘ But Gollum might do a bit of robbery and murder on Gollum own , ’ growled Sam . ‘ Keep your eyes open , Mr. Frodo ! There ’s a bottle full of water . Drink up . We can fill water again when we go on . ’ With that Sam plunged into sleep . 
  Light was fading again when Sam woke . Frodo sat propped against the rock behind , but Sam had fallen asleep . The water - bottle was empty . There was no sign of Gollum . 
  Mordor - dark had returned , and the watch - fires on the heights burned fierce and red , when the hobbits set out again on the most dangerous stage of all hobbits journey . hobbits went first to the little spring , and then climbing warily up hobbits came to the road at the point where road swung east towards the Isenmouthe twenty miles away . road was not a broad road , and road had no wall or parapet along the edge , and as road ran on the sheer drop from road brink became deeper and deeper . The hobbits could hear no movements , and after listening for a while hobbits set off eastward at a steady pace . 
  After doing some twelve miles , hobbits halted . A short way back the road had bent a little northward and the stretch that hobbits had passed over was now screened from sight . This proved disastrous . hobbits rested for some minutes and then went on ; but hobbits had not taken many steps when suddenly in the stillness of the night hobbits heard the sound that all along hobbits had secretly dreaded : the noise of marching feet . This was still some way behind hobbits , but looking back hobbits could see the twinkle of torches coming round the bend less than a mile away , and hobbits were moving fast : too fast for Frodo to escape by flight along the road ahead . 
  ‘ I feared This , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ We ’ ve trusted to luck , and This has failed us . We ’re trapped . ’ Frodo looked wildly up at the frowning wall , where the road - builders of old had cut the rock sheer for many fathoms above builders heads . Frodo ran to the other side and looked over the brink into a dark pit of gloom . ‘ We ’re trapped at last ! ’ Frodo said . Frodo sank to the ground beneath the wall of rock and bowed Frodo head . 
  ‘ Seems so , ’ said Sam . ‘ Well , we can but wait and see . ’ And with that Frodo sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff . 
  shadow did not have to wait long . The orcs were going at a great pace . Those in the foremost files bore torches . On Those came , red flames in the dark , swiftly growing . Now Sam too bowed Sam head , hoping that head would hide Sam face when the torches reached Those ; and Sam set Those shields before Those knees to hide Those feet . 
  ‘ If only Those are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired soldiers alone and pass on ! ’ Sam thought . 
  And so it seemed that Those would . The leading orcs came loping along , panting , holding orcs heads down . orcs were a gang of the smaller breeds being driven unwilling to orcs Dark Lord ’s wars ; all orcs cared for was to get the march over and escape the whip . Beside orcs , running up and down the line , went two of the large fierce uruks , cracking lashes and shouting . File after file passed , and the tell - tale torchlight was already some way ahead . Sam held Sam breath . Now more than half the line had gone by . Then suddenly one of the slave - drivers spied the two figures by the road - side . Sam flicked a whip at drivers and yelled : ‘ Hi , you ! Get up ! ’ drivers did not answer , and with a shout Sam halted the whole company . 
  ‘ Come on , you slugs ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ This is no time for slouching . ’ Sam took a step towards drivers , and even in the gloom Sam recognized the devices on drivers shields . ‘ Deserting , eh ? ’ Sam snarled . ‘ Or thinking of Deserting ? All your folk should have been inside Udûn before yesterday evening . You know that . Up you get and fall in , or I ’ll have your numbers and report you . ’ 
  numbers struggled to numbers feet , and keeping bent , limping like footsore soldiers , numbers shuffled back towards the rear of the line . ‘ No , not at the rear ! ’ the slave - driver shouted . ‘ Three files up . And stay there , or you ’ll know Three , when I come down the line ! ’ driver sent driver long whip - lash cracking over crack heads ; then with another crack and a yell driver started the company off again at a brisk trot . 
  company was hard enough for poor Sam , tired as Sam was ; but for Frodo company was a torment , and soon a nightmare . Sam set Sam teeth and tried to stop Sam mind from thinking , and Sam struggled on . The stench of the sweating orcs about Sam was stifling , and Sam began to gasp with thirst . On , on orcs went , and Sam bent all Sam will to draw Sam breath and to make Sam legs keep going ; and yet to what evil end Sam toiled and endured Sam did not dare to think . There was no hope of falling out unseen . Now and again the orc - driver fell back and jeered at hope . 
  ‘ There now ! ’ Sam laughed , flicking at hope legs . ‘ Where there ’s a whip there ’s a will , my slugs . Hold up ! I ’d give you a nice freshener now , only you ’ll get as much lash as your skins will carry when you come in late to your camp . Do you good . Do n’t you know we ’re at war ? ’ 
  hope had gone some miles , and the road was at last running down a long slope into the plain , when Frodo ’s strength began to give out and Frodo will wavered . Frodo lurched and stumbled . Desperately Sam tried to help Frodo and hold Frodo up , though Frodo felt that Frodo could Frodo hardly stay the pace much longer . At any moment now Frodo knew that the end would come : Frodo master would faint or fall , and all would be discovered , and all bitter efforts be in vain . ‘ I ’ll have that big slave - driving devil anyway , ’ Frodo thought . 
  Then just as Frodo was putting Frodo hand to the hilt of Frodo sword , there came an unexpected relief . all were out on the plain now and drawing near the entrance to Udûn . Some way in front of Udûn , before the gate at the bridge - end , the road from the west converged with others coming from the south , and from Barad - dûr . Along all the roads troops were moving ; for the Captains of the West were advancing and the Dark Lord was speeding Frodo forces north . So Lord chanced that several companies came together at the road - meeting , in the dark beyond the light of the watch - fires on the wall . At once there was great jostling and cursing as each troop tried to get first to the gate and the ending of companies march . Though the drivers yelled and plied drivers whips , scuffles broke out and some blades were drawn . A troop of heavy - armed uruks from Barad - dûr charged into the Durthang line and threw uruks into confusion . 
  Dazed as Sam was with pain and weariness , Sam woke up , grasped quickly at Sam chance , and threw Sam to the ground , dragging Frodo down with Frodo . Orcs fell over uruks , snarling and cursing . Slowly on hand and knee the hobbits crawled away out of the turmoil , until at last unnoticed hobbits dropped over the further edge of the road . Orcs had a high kerb by which troop - leaders could guide leaders in black night or fog , and Orcs was banked up some feet above the level of the open land . 
  leaders lay still for a while . It was too dark to seek for cover , if indeed there was any to find ; but Sam felt that leaders ought at least to get further away from the highways and out of the range of torchlight . 
  ‘ Come on , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Sam whispered . ‘ One more crawl , and then you can lie still . ’ 
  With a last despairing effort Frodo raised Frodo on Frodo hands , and struggled on for maybe twenty yards . Then Frodo pitched down into a shallow pit that opened unexpectedly before yards , and there Frodo lay like a dead thing . 
  Chapter 3 
  MOUNT DOOM 
  Sam put Frodo ragged orc - cloak under Frodo master ’s head , and covered master both with the grey robe of Lórien ; and as Frodo did so Frodo thoughts went out to that fair land , and to the Elves , and Frodo hoped that the cloth woven by Elves hands might have some virtue to keep Elves hidden beyond all hope in this wilderness of fear . Frodo heard the scuffling and cries die down as the troops passed on through the Isenmouthe . It seemed that in the confusion and the mingling of many companies of various kinds companies had not been missed , not yet at any rate . 
  Sam took a sip of water , but pressed Frodo to drink , and when Frodo master had recovered a little Frodo gave Frodo a whole wafer of master precious waybread and made Frodo eat wafer . Then , too worn out even to feel much fear , master stretched master out . master slept a little in uneasy fits ; for master sweat grew chill on master , and the hard stones bit master , and master shivered . Out of the north from the Black Gate through Cirith Gorgor there flowed whispering along the ground a thin cold air . 
  In the morning a grey light came again , for in the high regions the West Wind still blew , but down on the stones behind the fences of the Black Land the air seemed almost dead , chill and yet stifling . Sam looked up out of the hollow . The land all about was dreary , flat and drab - hued . On the roads nearby nothing was moving now ; but Sam feared the watchful eyes on the wall of the Isenmouthe , no more than a furlong away northward . South - eastward , far off like a dark standing shadow , loomed the Mountain . Smokes were pouring from Mountain , and while those that rose into the upper air trailed away eastward , great rolling clouds floated down Smokes sides and spread over the land . A few miles to the north - east the foothills of the Ashen Mountains stood like sombre grey ghosts , behind which the misty northern heights rose like a line of distant cloud hardly darker than the lowering sky . 
  Sam tried to guess the distances and to decide what way distances ought to take . ‘ way looks every step of fifty miles , ’ Sam muttered gloomily , staring at the threatening mountain , ‘ and that ’ll take a week , if that takes a day , with Mr. Frodo as Frodo is . ’ Sam shook Sam head , and as Sam worked things out , slowly a new dark thought grew in Sam mind . Never for long had hope died in Sam staunch heart , and always until now Sam had taken some thought for hope return . But the bitter truth came home to Sam at last : at best hope provision would take hope to hope goal ; and when the task was done , there hope would come to an end , alone , houseless , foodless in the midst of a terrible desert . There could be no return . 
  ‘ So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started , ’ thought Sam : ‘ to help Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with Frodo ? Well , if that is the job then I must do that . But I would dearly like to see Bywater again , and Rosie Cotton and Bywater brothers , and the Gaffer and Marigold and all . I ca n’t think somehow that Gandalf would have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand , if there had n’t a ’ been any hope of Sam ever coming back at all . Things all went wrong when Sam went down in Moria . I wish Sam had n’t . Sam would have done something . ’ 
  But even as hope died in Sam , or seemed to die , it was turned to a new strength . Sam ’s plain hobbit - face grew stern , almost grim , as the will hardened in Sam , and Sam felt through all Sam limbs a thrill , as if Sam was turning into some creature of stone and steel that neither despair nor weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue . 
  With a new sense of responsibility Sam brought Sam eyes back to the ground near at hand , studying the next move . As the light grew a little Sam saw to Sam surprise that what from a distance had seemed wide and featureless flats were in fact all broken and tumbled . Indeed the whole surface of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great holes , as if , while surface was still a waste of soft mud , it had been smitten with a shower of bolts and huge slingstones . The largest of these holes were rimmed with ridges of broken rock , and broad fissures ran out from holes in all directions . It was a land in which it would be possible to creep from hiding to hiding , unseen by all but the most watchful eyes : possible at least for one who was strong and had no need for speed . For the hungry and worn , who had far to go before life failed , life had an evil look . 
  Thinking of all these things Sam went back to Sam master . Sam had no need to rouse Gorgoroth . Frodo was lying on Gorgoroth back with eyes open , staring at the cloudy sky . ‘ Well , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam , ‘ I ’ ve been having a look round and thinking a bit . There ’s nothing on the roads , and we ’d best be getting away while there ’s a chance . Can you manage chance ? ’ 
  ‘ I can manage chance , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I must . ’ 
  Once more eyes started , crawling from hollow to hollow , flitting behind such cover as eyes could find , but moving always in a slant towards the foothills of the northern range . But as eyes went the most easterly of the roads followed eyes , until cover ran off , hugging the skirts of the mountains , away into a wall of black shadow far ahead . Neither man nor orc now moved along man flat grey stretches ; for the Dark Lord had almost completed the movement of Frodo forces , and even in the fastness of Frodo own realm Frodo sought the secrecy of night , fearing the winds of the world that had turned against Frodo , tearing aside Frodo veils , and troubled with tidings of bold spies that had passed through Frodo fences . 
  The hobbits had gone a few weary miles when hobbits halted . Frodo seemed nearly spent . Sam saw that Sam could not go much further in this fashion , crawling , stooping , now picking a doubtful way very slowly , now hurrying at a stumbling run . 
  ‘ I ’ m going back on to the road while the light lasts , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said . ‘ Trust to luck again ! luck nearly failed us last time , but luck did n’t quite . A steady pace for a few more miles , and then a rest . ’ 
  Sam was taking a far greater risk than Sam knew ; but Frodo was too much occupied with Sam burden and with the struggle in Sam mind to debate , and almost too hopeless to care . mind climbed on to the causeway and trudged along , down the hard cruel road that led to the Dark Tower Tower . But mind luck held , and for the rest of that day mind met no living or moving thing ; and when night fell mind vanished into the darkness of Mordor . All the land now brooded as at the coming of a great storm : for the Captains of the West had passed the Cross - roads and set flames in the deadly fields of Imlad Morgul . 
  So the desperate journey went on , as the Ring went south and the banners of the kings rode north . For the hobbits each day , each mile , was more bitter than the one before , as hobbits strength lessened and the land became more evil . hobbits met no enemies by day . At times by night , as hobbits cowered or drowsed uneasily in some hiding beside the road , hobbits heard cries and the noise of many feet or the swift passing of some cruelly ridden steed . But far worse than all such perils was the ever - approaching threat that beat upon perils as perils went : the dreadful menace of the Power that waited , brooding in deep thought and sleepless malice behind the dark veil about Power Throne . Nearer and nearer Power drew , looming blacker , like the oncoming of a wall of night at the last end of the world . 
  There came at last a dreadful nightfall ; and even as the Captains of the West drew near to the end of the living lands , the two wanderers came to an hour of blank despair . Four days had passed since days had escaped from the orcs , but the time lay behind days like an ever - darkening dream . All this last day Frodo had not spoken , but had walked half - bowed , often stumbling , as if Frodo eyes no longer saw the way before Frodo feet . Sam guessed that among all eyes pains Sam bore the worst , the growing weight of the Ring , a burden on the body and a torment to Sam mind . Anxiously Sam had noted how Sam master ’s left hand would often be raised as if to ward off a blow , or to screen Sam shrinking eyes from a dreadful Eye that sought to look in eyes . And sometimes Sam right hand would creep to Sam breast , clutching , and then slowly , as the will recovered mastery , it would be withdrawn . 
  Now as the blackness of night returned Frodo sat , Frodo head between Frodo knees , Frodo arms hanging wearily to the ground where Frodo hands lay feebly twitching . Sam watched Frodo , till night covered hands both and hid hands from one another . Frodo could no longer find any words to say ; and Frodo turned to Frodo own dark thoughts . As for Frodo , though weary and under a shadow of fear , Frodo still had some strength left . The lembas had a virtue without which hands would long ago have lain down to die . lembas did not satisfy desire , and at times Sam ’s mind was filled with the memories of food , and the longing for simple bread and meats . And yet this waybread of the Elves had a potency that increased as travellers relied on waybread alone and did not mingle potency with other foods . potency fed the will , and potency gave strength to endure , and to master sinew and limb beyond the measure of mortal kind . But now a new decision must be made . travellers could not follow this road any longer ; for decision went on eastward into the great Shadow , but the Mountain now loomed upon travellers right , almost due south , and travellers must turn towards decision . Yet still before decision there stretched a wide region of fuming , barren , ash - ridden land . 
  ‘ Water , water ! ’ muttered Sam . Sam had stinted Sam , and in Sam parched mouth Sam tongue seemed thick and swollen ; but for all Sam care mouth now had very little left , perhaps half Sam bottle , and maybe there were still days to go . All would long ago have been spent , if All had not dared to follow the orc - road . For at long intervals on that highway cisterns had been built for the use of troops sent in haste through the waterless regions . In one Sam had found some water left , stale , muddied by the orcs , but still sufficient for orcs desperate case . Yet that was now a day ago . There was no hope of any more . 
  At last wearied with At cares Sam drowsed , leaving the morrow till morrow came ; Sam could do no more . Dream and waking mingled uneasily . Sam saw lights like gloating eyes , and dark creeping shapes , and Sam heard noises as of wild beasts or the dreadful cries of tortured things ; and Sam would start up to find the world all dark and only empty blackness all about At . Once only , as Sam stood and stared wildly round , did it seem that , though now awake , Sam could still see pale lights like eyes ; but soon eyes flickered and vanished . 
  The hateful night passed slowly and reluctantly . Such daylight as followed was dim ; for here as the Mountain drew near the air was ever mirky , while out from the Dark Tower there crept the veils of Shadow that Sauron wove about Sauron . Frodo was lying on Frodo back not moving . Sam stood beside Frodo , reluctant to speak , and yet knowing that the word now lay with Frodo : Frodo must set Frodo master ’s will to work for another effort . At length , stooping and caressing Frodo ’s brow , Frodo spoke in Frodo ear . 
  ‘ Wake up , Master ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ Time for another start . ’ 
  As if roused by a sudden bell , Frodo rose quickly , and stood up and looked away southwards ; but when Frodo eyes beheld the Mountain and the desert Frodo quailed again . 
  ‘ I ca n’t manage Time , Sam , ’ Frodo said . ‘ It is such a weight to carry , such a weight . ’ 
  Sam knew before Sam spoke , that desert was vain , and that such words might do more harm than good , but in Sam pity Sam could not keep silent . ‘ Then let me carry Time a bit for you , Master , ’ Sam said . ‘ You know I would , and gladly , as long as I have any strength . ’ 
  A wild light came into Frodo ’s eyes . ‘ Stand away ! Do n’t touch me ! ’ Frodo cried . ‘ strength is mine , I say . Be off ! ’ Frodo hand strayed to Frodo sword - hilt . But then quickly Frodo voice changed . ‘ No , no , Sam , ’ Frodo said sadly . ‘ But you must understand . voice is my burden , and no one else can bear voice . voice is too late now , Sam dear . You ca n’t help me in that way again . I am almost in voice power now . I could not give voice up , and if you tried to take voice I should go mad . ’ 
  Sam nodded . ‘ I understand , ’ Sam said . ‘ But I ’ ve been thinking , Mr. Frodo , there ’s other things we might do without . Why not lighten the load a bit ? We ’re going that way now , as straight as we can make load . ’ Sam pointed to the Mountain . ‘ load ’s no good taking anything we ’re not sure to need . ’ 
  Frodo looked again towards the Mountain . ‘ No , ’ Sam said , ‘ we sha n’t need much on that road . And at road end nothing . ’ Picking up Sam orc - shield Sam flung shield away and threw Sam helmet after shield . Then pulling off the grey cloak Sam undid the heavy belt and let belt fall to the ground , and the sheathed sword with belt . The shreds of the black cloak Sam tore off and scattered . 
  ‘ There , I ’ll be an orc no more , ’ Sam cried , ‘ and I ’ll bear no weapon , fair or foul . Let no take me , if no will ! ’ 
  Sam did likewise , and put aside Sam orc - gear ; and Sam took out all the things in Sam pack . Somehow each of things had become dear to Sam , if only because Sam had borne things so far with so much toil . Hardest of all each was to part with Sam cooking - gear . Tears welled in Sam eyes at the thought of casting thought away . 
  ‘ Do you remember that bit of rabbit , Mr. Frodo ? ’ Sam said . ‘ And our place under the warm bank in Captain Faramir ’s country , the day I saw an oliphaunt ? ’ 
  ‘ No , I am afraid not , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ At least , I know that such things happened , but I can not see things . No taste of food , no feel of water , no sound of wind , no memory of tree or grass or flower , no image of moon or star are left to me . I am naked in the dark , Sam , and there is no veil between me and the wheel of fire . I begin to see fire even with my waking eyes , and all else fades . ’ 
  Sam went to Frodo and kissed Frodo hand . ‘ Then the sooner we ’re rid of the , the sooner to rest , ’ Frodo said haltingly , finding no better words to say . ‘ Talking wo n’t mend nothing , ’ Frodo muttered to Frodo , as Frodo gathered up all the things that things had chosen to cast away . Frodo was not willing to leave things lying open in the wilderness for any eyes to see . ‘ Stinker picked up that orc - shirt , seemingly , and Stinker is n’t going to add a sword to shirt . Frodo hands are bad enough when empty . And Frodo is n’t going to mess with my pans ! ’ With that Frodo carried all the gear away to one of the many gaping fissures that scored the land and threw fissures in . The clatter of Frodo precious pans as fissures fell down into the dark was like a death - knell to Frodo heart . 
  Frodo came back to Frodo , and then of Frodo elven - rope Frodo cut a short piece to serve Frodo master as a girdle and bind the grey cloak close about Frodo waist . The rest Frodo carefully coiled and put back in Frodo pack . Beside that Frodo kept only the remnants of remnants waybread and the water - bottle , and Sting still hanging by Sting belt ; and hidden away in a pocket of Sting tunic next Sting breast the phial of Galadriel and the little box that Galadriel gave Sting for Sting own . 
  Now at last remnants turned remnants faces to the Mountain and set out , thinking no more of concealment , bending remnants weariness and failing wills only to the one task of going on . In the dimness of Mountain dreary day few things even in that land of vigilance could have espied remnants , save from close at hand . Of all the slaves of the Dark Lord , only the Nazgûl could have warned Sting of the peril that crept , small but indomitable , into the very heart of Sting guarded realm . But the Nazgûl and Nazgûl black wings were abroad on other errand : Nazgûl were gathered far away , shadowing the march of the Captains of the West , and thither the thought of the Dark Tower was turned . 
  That day it seemed to Sam that Sam master had found some new strength , more than could be explained by the small lightening of the load that Sam had to carry . In the first marches master went further and faster than Sam had hoped . The land was rough and hostile , and yet master made much progress , and ever the Mountain drew nearer . But as the day wore on and all too soon the dim light began to fail , Frodo stooped again , and began to stagger , as if the renewed effort had squandered Frodo remaining strength . 
  At master last halt Frodo sank down and said : ‘ I ’ m thirsty , Sam , ’ and did not speak again . Sam gave Frodo a mouthful of water ; only one more mouthful remained . Frodo went without Frodo ; and now as once more the night of Mordor closed over thoughts , through all Frodo thoughts there came the memory of water ; and every brook or stream or fount that Frodo had ever seen , under green willow - shades or twinkling in the sun , danced and rippled for Frodo torment behind the blindness of Frodo eyes . Frodo felt the cool mud about Frodo toes as Frodo paddled in the Pool at Bywater with Jolly Cotton and Tom and Nibs , and Cotton sister Rosie . ‘ But that was years ago , ’ Frodo sighed , ‘ and far away . The way back , if there is one , goes past the Mountain . ’ 
  Frodo could not sleep and Frodo held a debate with Frodo . ‘ Well , come now , we ’ ve done better than you hoped , ’ Frodo said sturdily . ‘ Began well anyway . I reckon we crossed half the distance before we stopped . One more day will do distance . ’ And then Frodo paused . 
  ‘ Do n’t be a fool , Sam Gamgee , ’ came an answer in Frodo own voice . ‘ Gamgee wo n’t go another day like that , if Gamgee moves at all . And you ca n’t go on much longer giving Gamgee all the water and most of the food . ’ 
  ‘ I can go on a good way though , and I will . ’ 
  ‘ Where to ? ’ 
  ‘ To the Mountain , of course . ’ 
  ‘ But what then , Sam Gamgee , what then ? When you get there , what are you going to do ? Gamgee wo n’t be able to do anything for Gamgee . ’ 
  To Gamgee dismay Sam realized that Gamgee had not got an answer to this . Gamgee had no clear idea at all . Frodo had not spoken much to Gamgee of Frodo errand , and Sam only knew vaguely that the Ring had somehow to be put into the fire . ‘ The Cracks of Doom , ’ Frodo muttered , the old name rising to Frodo mind . ‘ Well , if Master knows how to find Cracks , I do n’t . ’ 
  ‘ There you are ! ’ came the answer . ‘ Master ’s all quite useless . Frodo said so Frodo . You are the fool , going on hoping and toiling . You could have lain down and gone to sleep together days ago , if you had n’t been so dogged . But you ’ll die just the same , or worse . You might just as well lie down now and give Master up . You ’ll never get to the top anyway . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ll get there , if I leave everything but my bones behind , ’ said Sam . ‘ And I ’ll carry Mr. Frodo up myself , if everything breaks my back and heart . So stop arguing ! ’ 
  At that moment Sam felt a tremor in the ground beneath Frodo , and Frodo heard or sensed a deep remote rumble as of thunder imprisoned under the earth . There was a brief red flame that flickered under the clouds and died away . The Mountain too slept uneasily . 
  The last stage of clouds journey to Orodruin came , and it was a torment greater than Sam had ever thought that Sam could bear . Sam was in pain , and so parched that Sam could no longer swallow even a mouthful of food . food remained dark , not only because of the smokes of the Mountain : there seemed to be a storm coming up , and away to the south - east there was a shimmer of lightnings under the black skies . Worst of all , the air was full of fumes ; breathing was painful and difficult , and a dizziness came on fumes , so that fumes staggered and often fell . And yet fumes wills did not yield , and fumes struggled on . 
  The Mountain crept up ever nearer , until , if fumes lifted fumes heavy heads , Mountain filled all fumes sight , looming vast before fumes : a huge mass of ash and slag and burned stone , out of which a sheer - sided cone was raised into the clouds . Before the daylong dusk ended and true night came again fumes had crawled and stumbled to night very feet . 
  With a gasp Frodo cast Frodo on the ground . Sam sat by Frodo . To Sam surprise Sam felt tired but lighter , and Sam head seemed clear again . No more debates disturbed Sam mind . Sam knew all the arguments of despair and would not listen to arguments . Sam will was set , and only death would break will . Sam felt no longer either desire or need of sleep , but rather of watchfulness . Sam knew that all the hazards and perils were now drawing together to a point : the next day would be a day of doom , the day of final effort or disaster , the last gasp . 
  But when would doom come ? The night seemed endless and timeless , minute after minute falling dead and adding up to no passing hour , bringing no change . Sam began to wonder if a second darkness had begun and no day would ever reappear . At last Sam groped for Frodo ’s hand . hand was cold and trembling . Sam master was shivering . 
  ‘ I did n’t ought to have left my blanket behind , ’ muttered Sam ; and lying down Sam tried to comfort Frodo with Sam arms and body . Then sleep took Sam , and the dim light of the last day of light quest found light side by side . The wind had fallen the day before as wind shifted from the West , and now wind came from the North and began to rise ; and slowly the light of the unseen Sun filtered down into the shadows where the hobbits lay . 
  ‘ Now for blanket ! Now for the last gasp ! ’ said Sam as Sam struggled to Sam feet . Sam bent over Frodo , rousing Frodo gently . Frodo groaned ; but with a great effort of will Sam staggered up ; and then Sam fell upon Sam knees again . Sam raised Sam eyes with difficulty to the dark slopes of Mount Doom towering above Frodo , and then pitifully Frodo began to crawl forward on Frodo hands . 
  Sam looked at Frodo and wept in Frodo heart , but no tears came to Frodo dry and stinging eyes . ‘ I said I ’d carry Frodo , if Come broke my back , ’ Frodo muttered , ‘ and I will ! ’ 
  ‘ Come , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Frodo cried . ‘ I ca n’t carry Come for you , but I can carry you and Come as well . So up you get ! Come on , Mr. Frodo dear ! Sam will give you a ride . Just tell Sam where to go , and Sam ’ll go . ’ 
  As Frodo clung upon Frodo back , arms loosely about Frodo neck , legs clasped firmly under Frodo arms , Sam staggered to Frodo feet ; and then to Frodo amazement Frodo felt the burden light . Frodo had feared that Frodo would have barely strength to lift Frodo master alone , and beyond that Frodo had expected to share in the dreadful dragging weight of the accursed Ring . But master was not so . Whether because Frodo was so worn by Frodo long pains , wound of knife , and venomous sting , and sorrow , fear , and homeless wandering , or because some gift of final strength was given to Sam , Sam lifted Frodo with no more difficulty than if Sam were carrying a hobbit - child pig - a - back in some romp on the lawns or hayfields of the Shire . Sam took a deep breath and started off . 
  hayfields had reached the Mountain ’s foot on Mountain northern side , and a little to the westward ; there Mountain long grey slopes , though broken , were not sheer . Frodo did not speak , and so Sam struggled on as best Sam could , having no guidance but the will to climb as high as might be before Sam strength gave out and Sam will broke . On Sam toiled , up and up , turning this way and that to lessen the slope , often stumbling forward , and at the last crawling like a snail with a heavy burden on slope back . When Sam will could drive Sam no further , and Sam limbs gave way , Sam stopped and laid Sam master gently down . 
  Frodo opened Sam eyes and drew a breath . Frodo was easier to breathe up here above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below . ‘ Thank you , Sam , ’ Sam said in a cracked whisper . ‘ How far is there to go ? ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t know , ’ said Sam , ‘ because I do n’t know where we ’re going . ’ 
  Sam looked back , and then Sam looked up ; and Sam was amazed to see how far Sam last effort had brought Sam . The Mountain standing ominous and alone had looked taller than Mountain was . Sam saw now that Mountain was less lofty than the high passes of the Ephel Dúath which Sam and Frodo had scaled . The confused and tumbled shoulders of Mountain great base rose for maybe three thousand feet above the plain , and above Sam was reared half as high again Mountain tall central cone , like a vast oast or chimney capped with a jagged crater . But already Sam was more than half way up the base , and the plain of Gorgoroth was dim below Sam , wrapped in fume and shadow . As Sam looked up Sam would have given a shout , if Sam parched throat had allowed Sam ; for amid the rugged humps and shoulders above Sam Sam saw plainly a path or road . throat climbed like a rising girdle from the west and wound snakelike about the Mountain , until before throat went round out of view throat reached the foot of the cone upon throat eastern side . 
  Sam could not see the course immediately above Gorgoroth , where throat was lowest , for a steep slope went up from where Gorgoroth stood ; but Sam guessed that if Sam could only struggle on just a little way further up , foot would strike this path . A gleam of hope returned to Sam . foot might conquer the Mountain yet . ‘ Why , Mountain might have been put there a - purpose ! ’ Sam said to Sam . ‘ If Mountain was n’t there , I ’d have to say I was beaten in the end . ’ 
  The path was not put there for the purposes of Sam . Sam did not know path , but Sam was looking at Sauron ’s Road from Barad - dûr to the Sammath Naur , the Chambers of Fire . Out from the Dark Tower ’s huge western gate Tower came over a deep abyss by a vast bridge of iron , and then passing into the plain Tower ran for a league between two smoking chasms , and so reached a long sloping causeway that led up on to the Mountain ’s eastern side . Thence , turning and encircling all Thence wide girth from south to north , south climbed at last , high in the upper cone , but still far from the reeking summit , to a dark entrance that gazed back east straight to the Window of the Eye in Sauron ’s shadow - mantled fortress . Often blocked or destroyed by the tumults of the Mountain ’s furnaces , always that road was repaired and cleared again by the labours of countless orcs . 
  Sam drew a deep breath . There was a path , but how Sam was to get up the slope to path Sam did not know . First Sam must ease Sam aching back . Sam lay flat beside Frodo for a while . Neither spoke . Slowly the light grew . Suddenly a sense of urgency which Sam did not understand came to Sam . It was almost as if Sam had been called : ‘ Now , now , or sense will be too late ! ’ Sam braced Sam and got up . Frodo also seemed to have felt the call . Sam struggled to Sam knees . 
  ‘ I ’ll crawl , Sam , ’ Sam gasped . 
  So foot by foot , like small grey insects , knees crept up the slope . knees came to the path and found that path was broad , paved with broken rubble and beaten ash . Frodo clambered on to path , and then moved as if by some compulsion Sam turned slowly to face the East . Far off the shadows of Sauron hung ; but torn by some gust of wind out of the world , or else moved by some great disquiet within , the mantling clouds swirled , and for a moment drew aside ; and then Sam saw , rising black , blacker and darker than the vast shades amid which disquiet stood , the cruel pinnacles and iron crown of the topmost tower of Barad - dûr . One moment only disquiet stared out , but as from some great window immeasurably high there stabbed northward a flame of red , the flicker of a piercing Eye ; and then the shadows were furled again and the terrible vision was removed . The Eye was not turned to shadows : Eye was gazing north to where the Captains of the West stood at bay , and thither all Eye malice was now bent , as the Power moved to strike Eye deadly blow ; but Frodo at that dreadful glimpse fell as one stricken mortally . Frodo hand sought the chain about Frodo neck . 
  Sam knelt by Frodo . Faint , almost inaudibly , Frodo heard Frodo whispering : ‘ Help me , Sam ! Help me , Sam ! Hold my hand ! I ca n’t stop hand . ’ Sam took Sam master ’s hands and laid hands together , palm to palm , and kissed hands ; and then Sam held hands gently between Sam own . The thought came suddenly to Sam : ‘ Sam ’s spotted us ! hand ’s all up , or hand soon will be . Now , Sam Gamgee , this is the end of ends . ’ 
  Again Sam lifted Frodo and drew Sam hands down to Sam own breast , letting Sam master ’s legs dangle . Then Sam bowed Sam head and struggled off along the climbing road . It was not as easy a way to take as way had looked at first . By fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great turmoils when Sam stood upon Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern and western slopes , and the road on this side was not blocked . Yet in many places road had crumbled away or was crossed by gaping rents . After climbing eastward for some time road bent back upon road at a sharp angle and went westward for a space . There at the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered stone once long ago vomited from the Mountain ’s furnaces . Panting under Sam load Sam turned the bend ; and even as Sam did so , out of the corner of Sam eye , Sam had a glimpse of something falling from the crag , like a small piece of black stone that had toppled off as Sam passed . 
  A sudden weight smote Sam and Sam crashed forward , tearing the backs of Sam hands that still clasped Sam master ’s . Then Sam knew what had happened , for above eye as eye lay Sam heard a hated voice . 
  ‘ Wicked masster ! ’ voice hissed . ‘ Wicked masster cheats us ; cheats Sméagol , gollum . Sméagol musstn’t go that way . Sméagol musstn’t hurt Preciouss . Give Preciouss to Sméagol , yess , give Preciouss to us ! Give Preciouss to Preciouss ! ’ 
  With a violent heave Sam rose up . At once Sam drew Sam sword ; but Sam could do nothing . Gollum and Frodo were locked together . Gollum was tearing at Gollum master , trying to get at the chain and the Ring . This was probably the only thing that could have roused the dying embers of Frodo ’s heart and will : an attack , an attempt to wrest Gollum treasure from Gollum by force . Gollum fought back with a sudden fury that amazed Sam , and Gollum also . Even so things might have gone far otherwise , if Gollum Gollum had remained unchanged ; but whatever dreadful paths , lonely and hungry and waterless , Gollum had trodden , driven by a devouring desire and a terrible fear , paths had left grievous marks on Gollum . Gollum was a lean , starved , haggard thing , all bones and tight - drawn sallow skin . A wild light flamed in Gollum eyes , but Gollum malice was no longer matched by Gollum old griping strength . Frodo flung Gollum off and rose up quivering . 
  ‘ Down , down ! ’ Gollum gasped , clutching Gollum hand to Gollum breast , so that beneath the cover of Gollum leather shirt Gollum clasped the Ring . ‘ Down , you creeping thing , and out of my path ! Your time is at an end . You can not betray me or slay me now . ’ 
  Then suddenly , as before under the eaves of the Emyn Muil , Sam saw these two rivals with other vision . A crouching shape , scarcely more than the shadow of a living thing , a creature now wholly ruined and defeated , yet filled with a hideous lust and rage ; and before creature stood stern , untouchable now by pity , a figure robed in white , but at creature breast creature held a wheel of fire . Out of the fire there spoke a commanding voice . 
  ‘ Begone , and trouble me no more ! If you touch me ever again , you shall be cast yourself into the Fire of Doom . ’ 
  The crouching shape backed away , terror in terror blinking eyes , and yet at the same time insatiable desire . 
  Then the vision passed and Sam saw Frodo standing , hand on breast , Sam breath coming in great gasps , and Gollum at Sam feet , resting on Sam knees with Sam wide - splayed hands upon the ground . 
  ‘ Look out ! ’ cried Sam . ‘ Sam ’ll spring ! ’ Sam stepped forward , brandishing Sam sword . ‘ Quick , Master ! ’ Sam gasped . ‘ Go on ! Go on ! No time to lose . I ’ll deal with Sam . Go on ! ’ 
  Frodo looked at Sam as if at one now far away . ‘ Yes , I must go on , ’ Sam said . ‘ Farewell , Sam ! This is the end at last . On Mount Doom doom shall fall . Farewell ! ’ Sam turned and went on , walking slowly but erect , up the climbing path . 
  ‘ Now ! ’ said Sam . ‘ At last I can deal with you ! ’ Sam leaped forward with drawn blade ready for battle . But Gollum did not spring . Sam fell flat upon the ground and whimpered . 
  ‘ Do n’t kill us , ’ Sam wept . ‘ Do n’t hurt us with nassty cruel steel ! Let us live , yes , live just a little longer . Lost lost ! We ’re lost . And when Precious goes we ’ll die , yes , die into the dust . ’ He clawed up the ashes of the path with He long fleshless fingers . ‘ Dusst ! ’ He hissed . 
  Sam ’s hand wavered . Sam mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil . It would be just to slay this treacherous , murderous creature , just and many times deserved ; and also it seemed the only safe thing to do . But deep in Sam heart there was something that restrained Sam : Sam could not strike this thing lying in the dust , forlorn , ruinous , utterly wretched . Sam Sam , though only for a little while , had borne the Ring , and now dimly Sam guessed the agony of Gollum ’s shrivelled mind and body , enslaved to that Ring , unable to find peace or relief ever in life again . But Sam had no words to express what Sam felt . 
  ‘ Oh , curse you , you stinking thing ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Go away ! Be off ! I do n’t trust you , not as far as I could kick you ; but be off . Or I shall hurt you , yes , with nasty cruel steel . ’ 
  Gollum got up on all fours , and backed away for several paces , and then Sam turned , and as Sam aimed a kick at Gollum Sam fled away down the path . Sam gave no more heed to Gollum . Sam suddenly remembered Sam master . Sam looked up the path and could not see Gollum . As fast as Sam could Gollum trudged up the road . If Sam had looked back , Sam might have seen not far below Gollum turn again , and then with a wild light of madness glaring in Sam eyes come , swiftly but warily , creeping on behind , a slinking shadow among the stones . 
  The path climbed on . Soon path bent again and with a last eastward course passed in a cutting along the face of the cone and came to the dark door in the Mountain ’s side , the door of the Sammath Naur . Far away now rising towards the South the sun , piercing the smokes and haze , burned ominous , a dull bleared disc of red ; but all Mordor lay about the Mountain like a dead land , silent , shadow - folded , waiting for some dreadful stroke . 
  Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in . mouth was dark and hot , and a deep rumbling shook the air . ‘ Frodo ! Master ! ’ Sam called . There was no answer . For a moment Sam stood , Sam heart beating with wild fears , and then Sam plunged in . A shadow followed Sam . 
  At first Sam could see nothing . In Sam great need Sam drew out once more the phial of Galadriel , but phial was pale and cold in Sam trembling hand and threw no light into that stifling dark . Sam was come to the heart of the realm of Sauron and the forges of Sam ancient might , greatest in Middle - earth ; all other powers were here subdued . Fearfully Sam took a few uncertain steps in the dark , and then all at once there came a flash of red that leaped upward , and smote the high black roof . Then Sam saw that Sam was in a long cave or tunnel that bored into the Mountain ’s smoking cone . But only a short way ahead cave floor and the walls on either side were cloven by a great fissure , out of which the red glare came , now leaping up , now dying down into darkness ; and all the while far below there was a rumour and a trouble as of great engines throbbing and labouring . 
  The light sprang up again , and there on the brink of the chasm , at the very Crack of Doom , stood Frodo , black against the glare , tense , erect , but still as if Frodo had been turned to stone . 
  ‘ Master ! ’ cried Sam . 
  Then Frodo stirred and spoke with a clear voice , indeed with a voice clearer and more powerful than Sam had ever heard Sam use , and voice rose above the throb and turmoil of Mount Doom , ringing in the roof and walls . 
  ‘ I have come , ’ Sam said . ‘ But I do not choose now to do what I came to do . I will not do this deed . The Ring is mine ! ’ And suddenly , as Sam set sight on Sam finger , Sam vanished from Sam ’s sight . Sam gasped , but Sam had no chance to cry out , for at that moment many things happened . 
  Something struck Sam violently in the back , Sam legs were knocked from under Sam and Sam was flung aside , striking Sam head against the stony floor , as a dark shape sprang over Sam . Sam lay still and for a moment all went black . 
  And far away , as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed all for Frodo own , even in Sammath Naur the very heart of Frodo realm , the Power in Barad - dûr was shaken , and the Tower trembled from Tower foundations to Tower proud and bitter crown . The Dark Lord was suddenly aware of Frodo , and Frodo Eye piercing all shadows looked across the plain to the door that Frodo had made ; and the magnitude of Frodo own folly was revealed to Frodo in a blinding flash , and all the devices of Frodo enemies were at last laid bare . Then Frodo wrath blazed in consuming flame , but Frodo fear rose like a vast black smoke to choke Frodo . For Frodo knew Frodo deadly peril and the thread upon which Frodo doom now hung . 
  From all Frodo policies and webs of fear and treachery , from all Frodo stratagems and wars Frodo mind shook free ; and throughout Frodo realm a tremor ran , Frodo slaves quailed , and Frodo armies halted , and Frodo captains suddenly steerless , bereft of will , wavered and despaired . For captains were forgotten . The whole mind and purpose of the Power that wielded captains was now bent with overwhelming force upon the Mountain . At Frodo summons , wheeling with a rending cry , in a last desperate race there flew , faster than the winds , the Nazgûl , the Ringwraiths , and with a storm of wings Ringwraiths hurtled southwards to Mount Doom . 
  Sam got up . Sam was dazed , and blood streaming from Sam head dripped in Sam eyes . Sam groped forward , and then Sam saw a strange and terrible thing . Gollum on the edge of the abyss was fighting like a mad thing with an unseen foe . To and fro Gollum swayed , now so near the brink that almost Gollum tumbled in , now dragging back , falling to the ground , rising , and falling again . And all the while Gollum hissed but spoke no words . 
  The fires below awoke in anger , the red light blazed , and all the cavern was filled with a great glare and heat . Suddenly Sam saw Gollum ’s long hands draw upwards to Gollum mouth ; Gollum white fangs gleamed , and then snapped as fangs bit . Frodo gave a cry , and there Gollum was , fallen upon Gollum knees at the chasm ’s edge . But Gollum , dancing like a mad thing , held aloft the ring , a finger still thrust within finger circle . finger shone now as if verily finger was wrought of living fire . 
  ‘ Precious , precious , precious ! ’ Gollum cried . ‘ My Precious ! O my Precious ! ’ And with that , even as Gollum eyes were lifted up to gloat on Gollum prize , Gollum stepped too far , toppled , wavered for a moment on the brink , and then with a shriek Gollum fell . Out of the depths came Gollum last wail Precious , and Gollum was gone . 
  There was a roar and a great confusion of noise . Fires leaped up and licked the roof . The throbbing grew to a great tumult , and the Mountain shook . Sam ran to Frodo and picked Frodo up and carried Frodo out to the door . And there upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur , high above the plains of Mordor , such wonder and terror came on Frodo that Frodo stood still forgetting all else , and gazed as one turned to stone . 
  A brief vision Frodo had of swirling cloud , and in the midst of cloud towers and battlements , tall as hills , founded upon a mighty mountain - throne above immeasurable pits ; great courts and dungeons , eyeless prisons sheer as cliffs , and gaping gates of steel and adamant : and then all passed . Towers fell and mountains slid ; walls crumbled and melted , crashing down ; vast spires of smoke and spouting steams went billowing up , up , until spires toppled like an overwhelming wave , and wave wild crest curled and came foaming down upon the land . And then at last over the miles between there came a rumble , rising to a deafening crash and roar ; the earth shook , the plain heaved and cracked , and Orodruin reeled . Fire belched from Fire riven summit . The skies burst into thunder seared with lightning . Down like lashing whips fell a torrent of black rain . And into the heart of the storm , with a cry that pierced all other sounds , tearing the clouds asunder , the Nazgûl came , shooting like flaming bolts , as caught in the fiery ruin of hill and sky bolts crackled , withered , and went out . 
  ‘ Well , this is the end , Sam Gamgee , ’ said a voice by Nazgûl side . And there was Frodo , pale and worn , and yet Nazgûl again ; and in Nazgûl eyes there was peace now , neither strain of will , nor madness , nor any fear . Nazgûl burden was taken away . There was the dear master of the sweet days in the Shire . 
  ‘ Master ! ’ cried Sam , and fell upon Sam knees . In all that ruin of the world for the moment Sam felt only joy , great joy . The burden was gone . Sam master had been saved ; Sam was Sam again , Sam was free . And then Sam caught sight of the maimed and bleeding hand . 
  ‘ Your poor hand ! ’ Sam said . ‘ And I have nothing to bind nothing with , or comfort nothing . I would have spared Sam a whole hand of mine rather . But Sam ’s gone now beyond recall , gone for ever . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But do you remember Gandalf ’s words : Even Gollum may have something yet to do ? But for Gandalf , Sam , I could not have destroyed the Ring . The Quest would have been in vain , even at the bitter end . So let us forgive Gandalf ! For the Quest is achieved , and now all is over . I am glad you are here with me . Here at the end of all things , Sam . ’ 
  Chapter 4 
  THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN 
  All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged . The Captains of the West were foundering in a gathering sea . The sun gleamed red , and under the wings of the Nazgûl the shadows of death fell dark upon the earth . Aragorn stood beneath Nazgûl banner , silent and stern , as one lost in thought of things long past or far away ; but Nazgûl eyes gleamed like stars that shine the brighter as the night deepens . Upon the hill - top stood Gandalf , and Gandalf was white and cold and no shadow fell on Gandalf . The onslaught of Mordor broke like a wave on the beleaguered hills , voices roaring like a tide amid the wreck and crash of arms . 
  As if to Gandalf eyes some sudden vision had been given , Gandalf stirred ; and Gandalf turned , looking back north where the skies were pale and clear . Then Gandalf lifted up Gandalf hands and cried in a loud voice ringing above the din : The Eagles are coming ! And many voices answered crying : The Eagles are coming ! The Eagles are coming ! The hosts of Mordor looked up and wondered what this sign might mean . 
  There came Gwaihir the Windlord , and Landroval Landroval brother , greatest of all the Eagles of the North , mightiest of the descendants of old Thorondor , who built Landroval eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the Encircling Mountains when Middle - earth was young . Behind descendants in long swift lines came all eyries vassals from the northern mountains , speeding on a gathering wind . Straight down upon the Nazgûl eyries bore , stooping suddenly out of the high airs , and the rush of eyries wide wings as eyries passed over was like a gale . 
  But the Nazgûl turned and fled , and vanished into Mordor ’s shadows , hearing a sudden terrible call out of the Dark Tower ; and even at that moment all the hosts of Mordor trembled , doubt clutched hosts hearts , hosts laughter failed , hosts hands shook and hosts limbs were loosed . The Power that drove hosts on and filled hosts with hate and fury was wavering , Power will was removed from hosts ; and now looking in the eyes of hosts enemies hosts saw a deadly light and were afraid . 
  Then all the Captains of the West cried aloud , for Captains hearts were filled with a new hope in the midst of darkness . Out from the beleaguered hills knights of Gondor , Riders of Rohan , Dúnedain of the North , close - serried companies , drove against Riders wavering foes , piercing the press with the thrust of bitter spears . But Gandalf lifted up Rohan arms and called once more in a clear voice : 
  ‘ Stand , Men of the West ! Stand and wait ! This is the hour of doom . ’ 
  And even as Rohan spoke the earth rocked beneath Riders feet . Then rising swiftly up , far above the Towers of the Black Gate , high above the mountains , a vast soaring darkness sprang into the sky , flickering with fire . The earth groaned and quaked . The Towers of the Teeth swayed , tottered , and fell down ; the mighty rampart crumbled ; the Black Gate was hurled in ruin ; and from far away , now dim , now growing , now mounting to the clouds , there came a drumming rumble , a roar , a long echoing roll of ruinous noise . 
  ‘ The realm of Sauron is ended ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The Ring - bearer has fulfilled bearer Quest . ’ And as the Captains gazed south to the Land of Mordor , it seemed to Captains that , black against the pall of cloud , there rose a huge shape of shadow , impenetrable , lightning - crowned , filling all the sky . Enormous Land reared above the world , and stretched out towards Captains a vast threatening hand , terrible but impotent : for even as Land leaned over Captains , a great wind took Land , and Land was all blown away , and passed ; and then a hush fell . 
  The Captains bowed Captains heads ; and when Captains looked up again , behold ! Captains enemies were flying and the power of Mordor was scattering like dust in the wind . As when death smites the swollen brooding thing that inhabits ants crawling hill and holds ants all in sway , ants will wander witless and purposeless and then feebly die , so the creatures of Sauron , orc or troll or beast spell - enslaved , ran hither and thither mindless ; and some slew creatures , or cast creatures in pits , or fled wailing back to hide in holes and dark lightless places far from hope . But the Men of Rhûn and of Harad , Easterling and Southron , saw the ruin of creatures war and the great majesty and glory of the Captains of the West . And those that were deepest and longest in evil servitude , hating the West , and yet were men proud and bold , in men turn now gathered those for a last stand of desperate battle . But the most part fled eastward as those could ; and some cast those weapons down and sued for mercy . 
  Then Gandalf , leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn and the other lords , stood upon the hill - top and called ; and down to Aragorn came the great eagle , Gwaihir the Windlord , and stood before Aragorn . 
  ‘ Twice you have borne me , Gwaihir my friend , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Thrice shall pay for all , if you are willing . You will not find me a burden much greater than when you bore me from Zirakzigil , where my old life burned away . ’ 
  ‘ I would bear you , ’ answered Gwaihir , ‘ whither you will , even were you made of stone . ’ 
  ‘ Then come , and let your brother go with us , and some other of your folk who is most swift ! For we have need of speed greater than any wind , outmatching the wings of the Nazgûl . ’ 
  ‘ The North Wind blows , but we shall outfly Wind , ’ said Gwaihir . And Nazgûl lifted up Gandalf and sped away south , and with Nazgûl went Landroval , and Meneldor young and swift . And Landroval passed over Udûn and Gorgoroth and saw all the land in ruin and tumult beneath Udûn , and before Udûn Mount Doom blazing , pouring out Doom fire . 
  ‘ I am glad that you are here with me , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Here at the end of all things , Sam . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I am with you , Master , ’ said Sam , laying Frodo ’s wounded hand gently to Frodo breast . ‘ And you ’re with me . And the journey ’s finished . But after coming all that way I do n’t want to give up yet . journey ’s not like me , somehow , if you understand . ’ 
  ‘ Maybe not , Sam , ’ said Frodo ; ‘ but journey ’s like things are in the world . Hopes fail . An end comes . We have only a little time to wait now . We are lost in ruin and downfall , and there is no escape . ’ 
  ‘ Well , Master , we could at least go further from this dangerous place here , from this Crack of Doom , if that ’s that name . Now could n’t we ? Come , Mr. Frodo , let ’s go down the path at any rate ! ’ 
  ‘ Very well , Sam . If you wish to go , I ’ll come , ’ said Frodo ; and Frodo rose and went slowly down the winding road ; and even as Well passed towards the Mountain ’s quaking feet , a great smoke and steam belched from the Sammath Naur , and the side of the cone was riven open , and a huge fiery vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain - side . 
  Frodo and Sam could go no further . Frodo last strength of mind and body was swiftly ebbing . Frodo had reached a low ashen hill piled at the Mountain ’s foot ; but from hill there was no more escape . hill was an island now , not long to endure , amid the torment of Orodruin . All about hill the earth gaped , and from deep rifts and pits smoke and fumes leaped up . Behind rifts the Mountain was convulsed . Great rents opened in Mountain side . Slow rivers of fire came down the long slopes towards rifts . Soon rifts would be engulfed . A rain of hot ash was falling . 
  rifts stood now ; and Sam still holding Sam master ’s hand caressed master . Sam sighed . ‘ What a tale we have been in , Mr. Frodo , have n’t we ? ’ Sam said . ‘ I wish I could hear tale told ! Do you think Frodo ’ll say : Now comes the story of Nine - fingered Frodo and the Ring of Doom ? And then everyone will hush , like we did , when in Rivendell Frodo told us the tale of Beren One - hand and the Great Jewel . I wish I could hear tale ! And I wonder how tale will go on after our part . ’ 
  But even while Sam spoke so , to keep fear away until the very last , Sam eyes still strayed north , north into the eye of the wind , to where the sky far off was clear , as the cold blast , rising to a gale , drove back the darkness and the ruin of the clouds . 
  And so it was that Gwaihir saw clouds with Gwaihir keen far - seeing eyes , as down the wild wind Gwaihir came , and daring the great peril of the skies Gwaihir circled in the air : two small dark figures , forlorn , hand in hand upon a little hill , while the world shook under clouds , and gasped , and rivers of fire drew near . And even as Gwaihir espied clouds and came swooping down , Gwaihir saw clouds fall , worn out , or choked with fumes and heat , or stricken down by despair at last , hiding clouds eyes from death . 
  Side by side clouds lay ; and down swept Gwaihir , and down came Landroval and Meneldor the swift ; and in a dream , not knowing what fate had befallen wanderers , the wanderers were lifted up and borne far away out of the darkness and the fire . 
  When Sam awoke , Sam found that Sam was lying on some soft bed , but over swift gently swayed wide beechen boughs , and through boughs young leaves sunlight glimmered , green and gold . All the air was full of a sweet mingled scent . 
  swift remembered that smell : the fragrance of Ithilien . ‘ Bless me ! ’ swift mused . ‘ How long have I been asleep ? ’ For the scent had borne swift back to the day when swift had lit swift little fire under the sunny bank ; and for the moment all else between was out of waking memory . swift stretched and drew a deep breath . ‘ Why , what a dream I ’ ve had ! ’ swift muttered . ‘ I am glad to wake ! ’ swift sat up and then swift saw that Frodo was lying beside swift , and slept peacefully , one hand behind swift head , and the other resting upon the coverlet . coverlet was the right hand , and the third finger was missing . 
  Full memory flooded back , and Sam cried aloud : ‘ dream was n’t a dream ! Then where are we ? ’ 
  And a voice spoke softly behind Sam : ‘ In the land of Ithilien , and in the keeping of the King ; and King awaits you . ’ With that Gandalf stood before Sam , robed in white , Sam beard now gleaming like pure snow in the twinkling of the leafy sunlight . ‘ Well , Master Samwise , how do you feel ? ’ Sam said . 
  But Sam lay back , and stared with open mouth , and for a moment , between bewilderment and great joy , Sam could not answer . At last Sam gasped : ‘ Gandalf ! I thought you were dead ! But then I thought I was dead myself . Is everything sad going to come untrue ? What ’s happened to the world ? ’ 
  ‘ A great Shadow has departed , ’ said Gandalf , and then Gandalf laughed , and the sound was like music , or like water in a parched land ; and as Gandalf listened the thought came to Sam that Gandalf had not heard laughter , the pure sound of merriment , for days upon days without count . thought fell upon Gandalf ears like the echo of all the joys Gandalf had ever known . But Gandalf Gandalf burst into tears . Then , as a sweet rain will pass down a wind of spring and the sun will shine out the clearer , Gandalf tears ceased , and Gandalf laughter welled up , and laughing Gandalf sprang from Gandalf bed . 
  ‘ How do I feel ? ’ Gandalf cried . ‘ Well , I do n’t know how to say Shadow . I feel , I feel ’ - Gandalf waved Gandalf arms in the air - ‘ I feel like spring after winter , and sun on the leaves ; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs I have ever heard ! ’ Gandalf stopped and Gandalf turned towards Gandalf master . ‘ But how ’s Mr. Frodo ? ’ Gandalf said . ‘ Is n’t Shadow a shame about Frodo poor hand ? But I hope Frodo ’s all right otherwise . Frodo ’s had a cruel time . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I am all right otherwise , ’ said Frodo , sitting up and laughing in Frodo turn . ‘ I fell asleep again waiting for you , Sam , you sleepy - head . I was awake early this morning , and now head must be nearly noon . ’ 
  ‘ Noon ? ’ said Sam , trying to calculate . ‘ Noon of what day ? ’ 
  ‘ The fourteenth of the New Year , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ or if you like , the eighth day of April in the Shire - reckoning . * But in Gondor the New Year will always now begin upon the twenty - fifth of March when Sauron fell , and when you were brought out of the fire to the King . King has tended you , and now King awaits you . You shall eat and drink with King . When you are ready I will lead you to King . ’ 
  ‘ The King ? ’ said Sam . ‘ What king , and who is King ? ’ 
  ‘ The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ and King has taken back all King ancient realm . King will ride soon to King crowning , but King waits for you . ’ 
  ‘ What shall we wear ? ’ said Sam ; for all Sam could see was the old and tattered clothes that clothes had journeyed in , lying folded on the ground beside clothes beds . 
  ‘ The clothes that you wore on your way to Mordor , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Even the orc - rags that you bore in the black land , Frodo , shall be preserved . No silks and linens , nor any armour or heraldry could be more honourable . But later I will find some other clothes , perhaps . ’ 
  Then Gandalf held out Gandalf hands to clothes , and clothes saw that one shone with light . ‘ What have you got there ? ’ Frodo cried . ‘ Can heraldry be — ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I have brought your two treasures . treasures were found on Sam when you were rescued , the Lady Galadriel ’s gifts : your glass , Frodo , and your box , Sam . You will be glad to have these safe again . ’ 
  When Hobbits were washed and clad , and had eaten a light meal , the Hobbits followed Gandalf . Hobbits stepped out of the beech - grove in which Hobbits had lain , and passed on to a long green lawn , glowing in sunshine , bordered by stately dark - leaved trees laden with scarlet blossom . Behind Hobbits trees could hear the sound of falling water , and a stream ran down before trees between flowering banks , until stream came to a greenwood at the lawn ’s foot and passed then on under an archway of trees , through which trees saw the shimmer of water far away . 
  As trees came to the opening in the wood , trees were surprised to see knights in bright mail and tall guards in silver and black standing there , who greeted trees with honour and bowed before trees . And then one blew a long trumpet , and trees went on through the aisle of trees beside the singing stream . So trees came to a wide green land , and beyond land was a broad river in a silver haze , out of which rose a long wooded isle , and many ships lay by land shores . But on the field where ships now stood a great host was drawn up , in ranks and companies glittering in the sun . And as the Hobbits approached swords were unsheathed , and spears were shaken , and horns and trumpets sang , and men cried with many voices and in many tongues : 
  ‘ Long live the Halflings ! Praise Halflings with great praise ! 
  Cuio i Pheriain anann ! Aglar’ni Pheriannath ! 
  Praise Halflings with great praise , Frodo and Samwise ! 
  Daur a Berhael , Conin en Annûn ! Eglerio ! 
  Praise Halflings ! 
  Eglerio ! 
  A laita te , laita te ! Andave laituvalmet ! 
  Praise Halflings ! 
  Cormacolindor , a laita tárienna ! 
  Praise Halflings ! The Ring - bearers , praise Halflings with great praise ! ’ 
  And so the red blood blushing in Frodo faces and Frodo eyes shining with wonder , Frodo and Sam went forward and saw that amidst the clamorous host were set three high - seats built of green turves . Behind the seat upon the right floated , white on green , a great horse running free ; upon the left was a banner , silver upon blue , a ship swan - prowed faring on the sea ; but behind the highest throne in the midst of all a great standard was spread in the breeze , and there a white tree flowered upon a sable field beneath a shining crown and seven glittering stars . On the throne sat a mail - clad man , a great sword was laid across man knees , but man wore no helm . As knees drew near man rose . And then knees knew man , changed as man was , so high and glad of face , kingly , lord of Men , dark - haired with eyes of grey . 
  Frodo ran to meet man , and Sam followed close behind . ‘ Well , if this is n’t the crown of all ! ’ man said . ‘ Strider , or I ’ m still asleep ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , Sam , Strider , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Strider is a long way , is it not , from Bree , where you did not like the look of me ? A long way for us all , but yours has been the darkest road . ’ 
  And then to Sam ’s surprise and utter confusion Sam bowed man knee before all ; and taking all by the hand , Frodo upon man right and Sam upon man left , man led all to the throne , and setting all upon throne , man turned to the Sam and captains who stood by and spoke , so that man voice rang over all the host , crying : 
  ‘ Praise all with great praise ! ’ 
  And when the glad shout had swelled up and died away again , to Sam ’s final and complete satisfaction and pure joy , a minstrel of Gondor stood forth , and knelt , and begged leave to sing . And behold ! minstrel said : 
  ‘ Lo ! lords and knights and men of valour unashamed , kings and princes , and fair people of Gondor , and Riders of Rohan , and ye sons of Elrond , and Dúnedain of the North , and Elf and Dwarf , and greathearts of the Shire , and all free folk of the West , now listen to my lay . For I will sing to you of Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the Ring of Doom . ’ 
  And when Sam heard that Sam laughed aloud for sheer delight , and Sam stood up and cried : ‘ O great glory and splendour ! And all my wishes have come true ! ’ And then Sam wept . 
  And all the host laughed and wept , and in the midst of host merriment and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver and gold , and all men were hushed . And Sam sang to men , now in the elven - tongue , now in the speech of the West , until men hearts , wounded with sweet words , overflowed , and men joy was like swords , and men passed in thought out to regions where pain and delight flow together and tears are the very wine of blessedness . 
  And at the last , as the Sun fell from the noon and the shadows of the trees lengthened , Sam ended . ‘ Praise wishes with great praise ! ’ Sam said and knelt . And then Aragorn stood up , and all the host arose , and host passed to pavilions made ready , to eat and drink and make merry while the day lasted . 
  Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent , and there Sam old raiment was taken off , but folded and set aside with honour ; and clean linen was given to Sam . Then Gandalf came and in Sam arms , to the wonder of Frodo , Sam bore the sword and the elven - cloak and the mithril - coat that had been taken from Sam in Mordor . For Sam Mordor brought a coat of gilded mail , and Mordor elven - cloak all healed of the soils and hurts that mail had suffered ; and then Mordor laid before soils two swords . 
  ‘ I do not wish for any sword , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ Tonight at least you should wear one , ’ said Gandalf . 
  Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam , and had been laid at Sam side in Cirith Ungol . ‘ Sting I gave to you Sam , ’ Sam said . 
  ‘ No , master ! Mr. Bilbo gave master to you , and master goes with Bilbo silver coat ; Bilbo would not wish anyone else to wear master now . ’ 
  Frodo gave way ; and Gandalf , as if Gandalf were Frodo esquire , knelt and girt the sword - belts about esquire , and then rising Gandalf set circlets of silver upon esquire heads . And when esquire were arrayed esquire went to the great feast ; and esquire sat at the King ’s table with Gandalf , and King Éomer of Rohan , and the Prince Imrahil and all the chief captains ; and there also were Gimli and Legolas . 
  But when , after the Standing Silence , wine was brought there came in two esquires to serve the kings ; or so esquires seemed to be : one was clad in the silver and sable of the Guards of Minas Tirith , and the other in white and green . But Sam wondered what such young boys were doing in an army of mighty men . Then suddenly as boys drew near and Sam could see boys plainly , Sam exclaimed : 
  ‘ Why , look Mr. Frodo ! Look here ! Well , if army is n’t Pippin . Mr. Peregrin Took I should say , and Mr. Merry ! How Peregrin have grown ! Bless me ! But I can see there ’s more tales to tell than ours . ’ 
  ‘ There are indeed , ’ said Pippin turning towards Merry . ‘ And we ’ll begin telling tales , as soon as this feast is ended . In the meantime you can try Gandalf . Gandalf ’s not so close as Gandalf used to be , though Gandalf laughs now more than Gandalf talks . For the present Merry and I are busy . We are knights of the City and of the Mark , as I hope you observe . ’ 
  At last the glad day ended ; and when the Sun was gone and the round Moon rode slowly above the mists of Anduin and flickered through the fluttering leaves , Frodo and Sam sat under the whispering trees amid the fragrance of fair Ithilien ; and Frodo talked deep into the night with Merry and Pippin and Gandalf , and after a while Legolas and Gimli joined Frodo . There Frodo and Sam learned much of all that had happened to the Company after Frodo fellowship was broken on the evil day at Parth Galen by Rauros Falls ; and still there was always more to ask and more to tell . 
  Orcs , and talking trees , and leagues of grass , and galloping riders , and glittering caves , and white towers and golden halls , and battles , and tall ships sailing , all these passed before Sam ’s mind until Sam felt bewildered . But amidst all these wonders Sam returned always to Sam astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin ; and Sam made wonders stand back to back with Frodo and Sam . Sam scratched Sam head . ‘ Ca n’t understand head at your age ! ’ Sam said . ‘ But there it is : you ’re three inches taller than you ought to be , or I ’ m a dwarf . ’ 
  ‘ That you certainly are not , ’ said Gimli . ‘ But what did I say ? Mortals can not go drinking ent - draughts and expect no more to come of Mortals than of a pot of beer . ’ 
  ‘ Ent - draughts ? ’ said Sam . ‘ There you go about Ents again ; but what Ents are beats me . Why , pot will take weeks before we get all these things sized up ! ’ 
  ‘ Weeks indeed , ’ said Pippin . ‘ And then Frodo will have to be locked up in a tower in Minas Tirith and write Tirith all down . Otherwise Frodo will forget half of Tirith , and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed . ’ 
  At length Gandalf rose . ‘ The hands of the King are hands of healing , dear friends , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ But you went to the very brink of death ere King recalled you , putting forth all King power , and sent you into the sweet forgetfulness of sleep . And though you have indeed slept long and blessedly , still it is now time to sleep again . ’ 
  ‘ And not only Sam and Frodo here , ’ said Gimli , ‘ but you too , Pippin . I love you , if only because of the pains you have cost me , which I shall never forget . Nor shall I forget finding you on the hill of the last battle . But for Gimli the Dwarf you would have been lost then . But at least I know now the look of a hobbit ’s foot , though it be all that can be seen under a heap of bodies . And when I heaved that great carcase off you , I made sure you were dead . I could have torn out my beard . And it is only a day yet since you were first up and abroad again . To bed now you go . And so shall I. ’ 
  ‘ And I , ’ said Legolas , ‘ shall walk in the woods of this fair land , which is rest enough . In days to come , if my Elven - lord allows , some of our folk shall remove hither ; and when we come it shall be blessed , for a while . For a while : a month , a life , a hundred years of Men . But Anduin is near , and Anduin leads down to the Sea . To the Sea ! 
  To the Sea , to the Sea ! The white gulls are crying , 
  The wind is blowing , and the white foam is flying . 
  West , west away , the round sun is falling . 
  Grey ship , grey ship , do you hear sun calling , 
  The voices of my people that have gone before me ? 
  I will leave , I will leave the woods that bore me ; 
  For our days are ending and our years failing . 
  I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing . 
  Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling , 
  Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling , 
  In Eressëa , in Elvenhome that no man can discover , 
  Where the leaves fall not : land of my people for ever ! ’ 
  And so singing Legolas went away down the hill . 
  Then the others also departed , and Frodo and Sam went to others beds and slept . And in the morning others rose again in hope and peace ; and others spent many days in Ithilien . For the Field of Cormallen , where the host was now encamped , was near to Henneth Annûn , and the stream that flowed from stream falls could be heard in the night as stream rushed down through stream rocky gate , and passed through the flowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of Cair Andros . The hobbits wandered here and there visiting again the places that hobbits had passed before ; and Sam hoped always in some shadow of the woods or secret glade to catch , maybe , a glimpse of the great Oliphaunt . And when Sam learned that at the siege of Gondor there had been a great number of these beasts but that beasts were all destroyed , Sam thought Gondor a sad loss . 
  ‘ Well , one ca n’t be everywhere at once , I suppose , ’ Sam said . ‘ But I missed a lot , seemingly . ’ 
  In the meanwhile the host made ready for the return to Minas Tirith . The weary rested and the hurt were healed . For some had laboured and fought much with the remnants of the Easterlings and Southrons , until all were subdued . And , latest of all , those returned who had passed into Mordor and destroyed the fortresses in the north of the land . 
  But at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of the West set out again ; and Captains went aboard ship with all Captains men , and Captains sailed from Cair Andros down Anduin to Osgiliath ; and there Captains remained for one day ; and the day after Captains came to the green fields of the Pelennor and saw again the white towers under tall Mindolluin , the Mindolluin of the Men of Gondor , last memory of Westernesse , that had passed through the darkness and fire to a new day . 
  And there in the midst of the fields fields set up fields pavilions and awaited the morning ; for morning was the Eve of May , and the King would enter King gates with the rising of the Sun . 
  Chapter 5 
  THE STEWARD AND THE KING 
  Over the Westernesse of Gondor doubt and great dread had hung . Fair weather and clear sun had seemed but a mockery to men whose days held little hope , and who looked each morning for news of doom . men lord was dead and burned , dead lay the King of Rohan in men citadel , and the new king that had come to men in the night was gone again to a war with powers too dark and terrible for any might or valour to conquer . And no news came . After the host left Morgul Vale and took the northward road beneath the shadow of the mountains no messenger had returned nor any rumour of what was passing in the brooding East . 
  When the Captains were but two days gone , the Lady Éowyn bade the Vale who tended messenger to bring messenger raiment , and messenger would not be gainsaid , but rose ; and when Captains had clothed messenger and set messenger arm in a sling of linen , messenger went to the Warden of the Houses of Healing . 
  ‘ Sir , ’ messenger said , ‘ I am in great unrest , and I can not lie longer in sloth . ’ 
  ‘ Lady , ’ King answered , ‘ you are not yet healed , and I was commanded to tend you with especial care . You should not have risen from your bed for seven days yet , or so I was bidden . I beg you to go back . ’ 
  ‘ I am healed , ’ messenger said , ‘ healed at least in body , save my left arm only , and that is at ease . But I shall sicken anew , if there is naught that I can do . Are there no tidings of war ? The women can tell me nothing . ’ 
  ‘ There are no tidings , ’ said the Warden , ‘ save that the Lords have ridden to Morgul Vale ; and men say that the new captain out of the North is men chief . A great lord is that , and a healer ; and it is a thing passing strange to me that the healing hand should also wield the sword . It is not thus in Gondor now , though once Gondor was so , if old tales be true . But for long years we healers have only sought to patch the rents made by the men of swords . Though we should still have enough to do without men : the world is full enough of hurts and mischances without wars to multiply men . ’ 
  ‘ world needs but one foe to breed a war , not two , Master Warden , ’ answered Éowyn . ‘ And those who have not swords can still die upon swords . Would you have the folk of Gondor gather you herbs only , when the Dark Lord gathers armies ? And it is not always good to be healed in body . Nor is it always evil to die in battle , even in bitter pain . Were I permitted , in this dark hour I would choose the latter . ’ 
  The Warden looked at pain . Tall Warden stood there , Lord eyes bright in Lord white face , Lord right hand clenched as Lord turned and gazed out of hand window that opened to the East . face sighed and shook East head . After a pause Lord turned to head again . 
  ‘ Is there no deed to do ? ’ Lord said . ‘ Who commands in this City ? ’ 
  ‘ I do not rightly know , ’ head answered . ‘ Such things are not my care . There is a marshal over the Riders of Rohan ; and the Lord Húrin , I am told , commands the Rohan of Gondor . But the Lord Faramir is by right the Steward of the City . ’ 
  ‘ Where can I find Rohan ? ’ 
  ‘ In this house , lady . Rohan was sorely hurt , but is now set again on the way to health . But I do not know — ’ 
  ‘ Will you not bring me to Rohan ? Then you will know . ’ 
  The Lord Faramir was walking alone in the garden of the Houses of Healing , and the sunlight warmed Faramir , and Rohan felt life run new in Rohan veins ; but Rohan heart was heavy , and Rohan looked out over the walls eastward . And coming , the Warden spoke Rohan name , and Rohan turned and saw the Lady Éowyn of Rohan ; and Rohan was moved with pity , for Rohan saw that Warden was hurt , and Rohan clear sight perceived Éowyn sorrow and unrest . 
  ‘ My lord , ’ said the Warden , ‘ here is the Lady Éowyn of Rohan . Éowyn rode with the king and was sorely hurt , and dwells now in my keeping . But king is not content , and king wishes to speak to the Steward of the City . ’ 
  ‘ Do not misunderstand Rohan , lord , ’ said Éowyn . ‘ It is not lack of care that grieves me . No houses could be fairer , for those who desire to be healed . But I can not lie in sloth , idle , caged . I looked for death in battle . But I have not died , and battle still goes on . ’ 
  At a sign from Faramir , the Warden bowed and departed . ‘ What would you have me do , lady ? ’ said Faramir . ‘ I also am a prisoner of the healers . ’ prisoner looked at Warden , and being a man whom pity deeply stirred , it seemed to prisoner that man loveliness amid man grief would pierce prisoner heart . And man looked at prisoner and saw the grave tenderness in prisoner eyes , and yet knew , for man was bred among men of war , that here was one whom no Rider of the Mark would outmatch in battle . 
  ‘ What do you wish ? ’ prisoner said again . ‘ If Rider lies in my power , I will do Rider . ’ 
  ‘ I would have you command this Warden , and bid Warden let me go , ’ man said ; but though man words were still proud , man heart faltered , and for the first time man doubted man . man guessed that this tall man , both stern and gentle , might think man merely wayward , like a child that has not the firmness of mind to go on with a dull task to the end . 
  ‘ I myself am in the Warden ’s keeping , ’ answered Faramir . ‘ Nor have I yet taken up my authority in the City . But had I done so , I should still listen to City counsel , and should not cross counsel will in matters of counsel craft , unless in some great need . ’ 
  ‘ But I do not desire healing , ’ Faramir said . ‘ I wish to ride to war like my brother Éomer , or better like Théoden the king , for brother died and has both honour and peace . ’ 
  ‘ It is too late , lady , to follow the Captains , even if you had the strength , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But death in battle may come to us all yet , willing or unwilling . You will be better prepared to face death in your own manner , if while there is still time you do as the Healer commanded . You and I , we must endure with patience the hours of waiting . ’ 
  Faramir did not answer , but as Healer looked at Faramir it seemed to brother that something in Faramir softened , as though a bitter frost were yielding at the first faint presage of spring . A tear sprang in Faramir eye and fell down Faramir cheek , like a glistening rain - drop . Faramir proud head drooped a little . Then quietly , more as if speaking to Faramir than to head : ‘ But the healers would have me lie abed seven days yet , ’ Faramir said . ‘ And my window does not look eastward . ’ Faramir voice was now that of a maiden young and sad . 
  Faramir smiled , though head heart was filled with pity . ‘ Your window does not look eastward ? ’ head said . ‘ That can be amended . In this I will command the Warden . If you will stay in this house in our care , lady , and take your rest , then you shall walk in this garden in the sun , as you will ; and you shall look east , whither all our hopes have gone . And here you will find me , walking and waiting , and also looking east . east would ease my care , if you would speak to me , or walk at whiles with me . ’ 
  Then lady raised lady head and looked head in the eyes again ; and a colour came in lady pale face . ‘ How should I ease your care , my lord ? ’ lady said . ‘ And I do not desire the speech of living men . ’ 
  ‘ Would you have my plain answer ? ’ head said . 
  ‘ I would . ’ 
  ‘ Then , Éowyn of Rohan , I say to you that you are beautiful . In the valleys of our hills there are flowers fair and bright , and maidens fairer still ; but neither flower nor lady have I seen till now in Gondor so lovely , and so sorrowful . It may be that only a few days are left ere darkness falls upon our world , and when darkness comes I hope to face darkness steadily ; but darkness would ease my heart , if while the Sun yet shines , I could see you still . For you and I have both passed under the wings of the Shadow , and the same hand drew us back . ’ 
  ‘ Alas , not me , lord ! ’ Alas said . ‘ Shadow lies on me still . Look not to me for healing ! I am a shieldmaiden and my hand is ungentle . But I thank you for this at least , that I need not keep to my chamber . I will walk abroad by the grace of the Steward of the City . ’ And Steward did City a courtesy and walked back to the house . But Faramir for a long while walked alone in the garden , and Faramir glance now strayed rather to the house than to the eastward walls . 
  When Faramir returned to Faramir chamber Faramir called for the Warden , and heard all that Faramir could tell of the Lady of Rohan . 
  ‘ But I doubt not , lord , ’ said the Warden , ‘ that you would learn more from the Halfling that is with us ; for Halfling was in the riding of the king , and with the Lady at the end , Lady say . ’ 
  And so Merry was sent to Faramir , and while that day lasted Lady talked long together , and Faramir learned much , more even than Merry put into words ; and Faramir thought that Faramir understood now something of the grief and unrest of Éowyn of Rohan . And in the fair evening Faramir and Merry walked in the garden , but Steward did not come . 
  But in the morning , as Faramir came from the Houses , Rohan saw Steward , as Steward stood upon the walls ; and Steward was clad all in white , and gleamed in the sun . And Rohan called to Steward , and Steward came down , and Houses walked on the grass or sat under a green tree together , now in silence , now in speech . And each day after Houses did likewise . And the Warden looking from Rohan window was glad in heart , for Rohan was a healer , and Rohan care was lightened ; and certain it was that , heavy as was the dread and foreboding of those days upon the hearts of men , still these two of Rohan charges prospered and grew daily in strength . 
  And so the fifth day came since the Lady Éowyn went first to Faramir ; and charges stood now together once more upon the walls of the City and looked out . No tidings had yet come , and all hearts were darkened . The weather , too , was bright no longer . weather was cold . A wind that had sprung up in the night was blowing now keenly from the North , and wind was rising ; but the lands about looked grey and drear . 
  lands were clad in warm raiment and heavy cloaks , and over all the Lady Éowyn wore a great blue mantle of the colour of deep summer - night , and Éowyn was set with silver stars about hem and throat . Faramir had sent for this robe and had wrapped robe about North ; and Faramir thought that North looked fair and queenly indeed as North stood there at Faramir side . The mantle was wrought for Faramir mother , Finduilas of Amroth , who died untimely , and was to Faramir but a memory of loveliness in far days and of Faramir first grief ; and mother robe seemed to Faramir raiment fitting for the beauty and sadness of Éowyn . 
  But mother now shivered beneath the starry mantle , and mother looked northward , above the grey hither lands , into the eye of the cold wind where far away the sky was hard and clear . 
  ‘ What do you look for , Éowyn ? ’ said Faramir . 
  ‘ Does not the Black Gate lie yonder ? ’ said grey . ‘ And must Gate not now be come thither ? Gate is seven days since . rode away . ’ 
  ‘ Seven days , ’ said Faramir . ‘ But think not ill of me , if I say to you : days have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to know . Joy to see you ; but pain , because now the fear and doubt of this evil time are grown dark indeed . Éowyn , I would not have this world end now , or lose so soon what I have found . ’ 
  ‘ Lose what you have found , lord ? ’ Faramir answered ; but Faramir looked at world gravely and Faramir eyes were kind . ‘ I know not what in these days you have found that you could lose . But come , my friend , let us not speak of time ! Let us not speak at all ! I stand upon some dreadful brink , and it is utterly dark in the abyss before my feet , but whether there is any light behind me I can not tell . For I can not turn yet . I wait for some stroke of doom . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , we wait for the stroke of doom , ’ said Faramir . And Faramir said no more ; and it seemed to stroke as stroke stood upon the wall that the wind died , and the light failed , and the Sun was bleared , and all sounds in the City or in the lands about were hushed : neither wind , nor voice , nor bird - call , nor rustle of leaf , nor stroke own breath could be heard ; the very beating of stroke hearts was stilled . Time halted . 
  And as hands stood so , hands hands met and clasped , though hands did not know Time . And still hands waited for hands knew not what . Then presently it seemed to hands that above the ridges of the distant mountains another vast mountain of darkness rose , towering up like a wave that should engulf the world , and about mountain lightnings flickered ; and then a tremor ran through the earth , and hands felt the walls of the City quiver . A sound like a sigh went up from all the lands about hands ; and hands hearts beat suddenly again . 
  ‘ sound reminds me of Númenor , ’ said Faramir , and wondered to hear Faramir speak . 
  ‘ Of Númenor ? ’ said Éowyn . 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Faramir , ‘ of the land of Westernesse that foundered , and of the great dark wave climbing over the green lands and above the hills , and coming on , darkness unescapable . I often dream of that . ’ 
  ‘ Then you think that the Darkness is coming ? ’ said Éowyn . ‘ Darkness Unescapable ? ’ And suddenly Éowyn drew close to Éowyn . 
  ‘ No , ’ said Faramir , looking into Faramir face . ‘ No was but a picture in the mind . I do not know what is happening . The reason of my waking mind tells me that great evil has befallen and we stand at the end of days . But my heart says nay ; and all my limbs are light , and a hope and joy are come to me that no reason can deny . Éowyn , Éowyn , White Lady of Rohan , in this hour I do not believe that any darkness will endure ! ’ And Lady stooped and kissed Rohan brow . 
  And so limbs stood on the walls of the Éowyn of Gondor , and a great wind rose and blew , and limbs hair , raven and golden , streamed out mingling in the air . And the Shadow departed , and the Sun was unveiled , and light leaped forth ; and the waters of Anduin shone like silver , and in all the houses of the City Sun sang for the joy that welled up in waters hearts from what source waters could not tell . 
  And before the Sun had fallen far from the noon out of the East there came a great Eagle flying , and Lady bore tidings beyond hope from the Lords of the West , crying : 
  Sing now , ye people of the Tower of Anor , 
  for the Realm of Sauron is ended for ever , 
  and the Dark Tower is thrown down . 
  Sing and rejoice , ye people of the Tower of Guard , 
  for your watch hath not been in vain , 
  and the Black Gate is broken , 
  and your King hath passed through , 
  and King is victorious . 
  Sing and be glad , all ye children of the West , 
  for your King shall come again , 
  and King shall dwell among you 
  all the days of your life . 
  And the Tree that was withered shall be renewed , 
  and King shall plant Tree in the high West , 
  and the City shall be blessed . 
  Sing all ye people ! 
  And the people sang in all the ways of the City . 
  The days that followed were golden , and Spring and Summer joined and made revel together in the fields of Gondor . And tidings now came by swift riders from Cair Andros of all that was done , and the City made ready for the coming of the King . Merry was summoned and rode away with the wains that took store of goods to Osgiliath and thence by ship to Cair Andros ; but Faramir did not go , for now being healed King took upon King King authority and the Stewardship , although Faramir was only for a little while , and King duty was to prepare for one who should replace King . 
  And Éowyn did not go , though Summer brother sent word begging Summer to come to the field of Cormallen . And Faramir wondered at this , but brother saw Summer seldom , being busy with many matters ; and Summer dwelt still in the Houses of Healing and walked alone in the garden , and Summer face grew pale again , and it seemed that in all the City Summer only was ailing and sorrowful . And the Warden of the Houses was troubled , and brother spoke to Faramir . 
  Then Faramir came and sought Summer , and once more Houses stood on the walls together ; and brother said to Summer : ‘ Éowyn , why do you tarry here , and do not go to the rejoicing in Cormallen beyond Cair Andros , where your brother awaits you ? ’ 
  And Summer said : ‘ Do you not know ? ’ 
  But brother answered : ‘ Two reasons there may be , but which is true , I do not know . ’ 
  And Summer said : ‘ I do not wish to play at riddles . Speak plainer ! ’ 
  ‘ Then if you will have rejoicing so , lady , ’ brother said : ‘ you do not go , because only your brother called for you , and to look on the Lord Aragorn , Elendil ’s heir , in Elendil triumph would now bring you no joy . Or because I do not go , and you desire still to be near me . And maybe for both these reasons , and you yourself can not choose between reasons . Éowyn , do you not love me , or will you not ? ’ 
  ‘ I wished to be loved by another , ’ Summer answered . ‘ But I desire no man ’s pity . ’ 
  ‘ That I know , ’ brother said . ‘ You desired to have the love of the Lord Aragorn . Because Aragorn was high and puissant , and you wished to have renown and glory and to be lifted far above the mean things that crawl on the earth . And as a great captain may to a young soldier captain seemed to you admirable . For so captain is , a lord among men , the greatest that now is . But when captain gave you only understanding and pity , then you desired to have nothing , unless a brave death in battle . Look at me , Éowyn ! ’ 
  And Éowyn looked at Faramir long and steadily ; and Faramir said : ‘ Do not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart , Éowyn ! But I do not offer you my pity . For you are a lady high and valiant and have yourself won renown that shall not be forgotten ; and you are a lady beautiful , I deem , beyond even the words of the elven - tongue to tell . And I love you . Once I pitied your sorrow . But now , were you sorrowless , without fear or any lack , were you the blissful Queen of Gondor , still I would love you . Éowyn , do you not love me ? ’ 
  Then the heart of Éowyn changed , or else at last Éowyn understood heart . And suddenly Gondor winter passed , and the sun shone on Queen . 
  ‘ I stand in Minas Anor , the Tower of the Sun , ’ Queen said ; ‘ and behold ! the Shadow has departed ! I will be a shieldmaiden no longer , nor vie with the great Riders , nor take joy only in the songs of slaying . I will be a healer , and love all things that grow and are not barren . ’ And again Queen looked at Faramir . ‘ No longer do I desire to be a queen , ’ Queen said . 
  Then Faramir laughed merrily . ‘ That is well , ’ queen said ; ‘ for I am not a king . Yet I will we d with the White Lady of Rohan , if king be Lady will . And if Lady will , then let us cross the River and in happier days let us dwell in fair Ithilien and there make a garden . All things will grow with joy there , if the White Lady comes . ’ 
  ‘ Then must I leave my own people , man of Gondor ? ’ Lady said . ‘ And would you have your proud folk say of you : “ There goes a lord who tamed a wild shieldmaiden of the North ! Was there no woman of the race of Númenor to choose ? ” ’ 
  ‘ I would , ’ said Faramir . And Faramir took Lady in Faramir arms and kissed Lady under the sunlit sky , and Faramir cared not that arms stood high upon the walls in the sight of many . And many indeed saw arms and the light that shone about arms as arms came down from the walls and went hand in hand to the Houses of Healing . 
  And to the Warden of the Houses Faramir said : ‘ Here is the Lady Éowyn of Rohan , and now Éowyn is healed . ’ 
  And the Warden said : ‘ Then I release Rohan from my charge and bid Rohan farewell , and may Rohan suffer never hurt nor sickness again . I commend Rohan to the care of the Steward of the Éowyn , until Rohan brother returns . ’ 
  But Éowyn said : ‘ Yet now that I have leave to depart , I would remain . For this House has become to me of all dwellings the most blessed . ’ And Lady remained there until King Éomer came . 
  All things were now made ready in the City ; and there was great concourse of people , for the tidings had gone out into all parts of Gondor , from Min - Rimmon even to Pinnath Gelin and the far coasts of the sea ; and all that could come to the City made haste to come . And the City was filled again with women and fair children that returned to women homes laden with flowers ; and from Dol Amroth came the harpers that harped most skilfully in all the land ; and there were players upon viols and upon flutes and upon horns of silver , and clear - voiced singers from the vales of Lebennin . 
  At last an evening came when from the walls the pavilions could be seen upon the field , and all night lights were burning as men watched for the dawn . And when the sun rose in the clear morning above the mountains in the East , upon which shadows lay no more , then all the bells rang , and all the banners broke and flowed in the wind ; and upon the White Tower of the citadel the standard of the Stewards , bright argent like snow in the sun , bearing no charge nor device , was raised over Gondor for the last time . 
  Now the Captains of the West led Captains host towards the City , and folk saw Captains advance in line upon line , flashing and glinting in the sunrise and rippling like silver . And so Captains came before the Gateway and halted a furlong from the walls . As yet no gates had been set up again , but a barrier was laid across the entrance to the City , and there stood men at arms in silver and black with long swords drawn . Before the barrier stood Faramir the Steward , and Húrin Warden of the Keys , and other captains of Gondor , and the Lady Éowyn of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many knights of the Mark ; and upon either side of the Gate was a great press of fair people in raiment of many colours and garlands of flowers . 
  So now there was a wide space before the walls of Minas Tirith , and Tirith was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the soldiers of Gondor and of Rohan , and by the people of the City and of all parts of the land . A hush fell upon all as out from the host stepped the Dúnedain in silver and grey ; and before host came walking slow the Lord Aragorn . Dúnedain was clad in black mail girt with silver , and Dúnedain wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at the throat with a great jewel of green that shone from afar ; but Dúnedain head was bare save for a star upon Dúnedain forehead bound by a slender fillet of silver . With Dúnedain were Éomer of Rohan , and the Prince Imrahil , and Gandalf robed all in white , and four small figures that many men marvelled to see . 
  ‘ Nay , cousin ! cousin are not boys , ’ said Ioreth to Gandalf kinswoman from Imloth Melui , who stood beside Gandalf . ‘ Those are Periain , out of the far country of the Halflings , where Those are princes of great fame , it is said . I should know , for I had one to tend in the Houses . Houses are small , but Houses are valiant . Why , cousin , one of Houses went with only Periain esquire into the Black Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by Periain , and set fire to Periain Tower , if you can believe fire . At least that is the tale in the City . That will be the one that walks with our Elfstone . Houses are dear friends , I hear . Now Periain is a marvel , the Lord Elfstone : not too soft in Periain speech , mind you , but Periain has a golden heart , as the saying is ; and Periain has the healing hands . “ The hands of the king are the hands of a healer ” , I said ; and that was how that was all discovered . And Mithrandir , Periain said to me : “ Ioreth , men will long remember your words ” , and — ’ 
  But Ioreth was not permitted to continue the instruction of Ioreth kinswoman from the country , for a single trumpet rang , and a dead silence followed . Then forth from the Gate went Faramir with Húrin of the Keys , and no others , save that behind Keys walked four men in the high helms and armour of the Citadel , and Keys bore a great casket of black lebethron bound with silver . 
  Faramir met Aragorn in the midst of those there assembled , and Aragorn knelt , and said : ‘ The last Steward of Gondor begs leave to surrender Periain office . ’ And Aragorn held out a white rod ; but Aragorn took the rod and gave rod back , saying : ‘ That office is not ended , and office shall be thine and thy heirs ’ as long as my line shall last . Do now thy office ! ’ 
  Then Faramir stood up and spoke in a clear voice : ‘ Men of Gondor , hear now the Steward of this Realm ! Behold ! one has come to claim the kingship again at last . Here is Aragorn son of Arathorn , chieftain of the Dúnedain of Arnor , Captain of the Host of the West , bearer of the Star of the North , wielder of the Sword Reforged , victorious in battle , whose hands bring healing , the Elfstone , Elessar of the line of Valandil , Isildur ’s son , Elendil ’s son of Númenor . Shall Elessar be king and enter into the Arathorn and dwell there ? ’ 
  And all the host and all the Valandil cried yea with one voice . 
  And Ioreth said to Ioreth kinswoman : ‘ This is just a ceremony such as we have in the Arathorn , cousin ; for cousin has already entered , as I was telling you ; and cousin said to me — ’ And then again kinswoman was obliged to silence , for Faramir spoke again . 
  ‘ Men of Gondor , the loremasters tell that it was the custom of old that the king should receive the crown from cousin father ere cousin died ; or if that might not be , that cousin should go alone and take that from the hands of cousin father in the tomb where cousin was laid . But since things must now be done otherwise , using the authority of the Steward , I have today brought hither from Rath Dínen the crown of Eärnur the last king , whose days passed in the time of our longfathers of old . ’ 
  Then the guards stepped forward , and Faramir opened the casket , and Faramir held up an ancient crown . casket was shaped like the helms of the Guards of the Citadel , save that casket was loftier , and casket was all white , and the wings at either side were wrought of pearl and silver in the likeness of the wings of a sea - bird , for casket was the emblem of kings who came over the Sea ; and seven gems of adamant were set in the circlet , and upon casket summit was set a single jewel the light of which went up like a flame . 
  Then Aragorn took the crown and held crown up and said : 
  Et Eärello Endorenna utúlien . Sinome maruvan ar Hildinyar tenn ’ Ambar - metta ! 
  And those were the words that Elendil spoke when Elendil came up out of the Sea on the wings of the wind : ‘ Out of the Great Sea to Middle - earth I am come . In this Sea will I abide , and my heirs , unto the ending of the world . ’ 
  Then to the wonder of many Aragorn did not put the crown upon Elendil head , but gave crown back to Faramir , and said : ‘ By the labour and valour of many I have come into my inheritance . In token of this I would have the Ring - bearer bring the crown to me , and let Mithrandir set crown upon my head , if Mithrandir will ; for Mithrandir has been the mover of all that has been accomplished , and this is Mithrandir victory . ’ 
  Then Frodo came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore crown to Gandalf ; and Aragorn knelt , and Gandalf set the White Crown upon Gandalf head , and said : 
  ‘ Now come the days of the King , and may days be blessed while the thrones of the Valar endure ! ’ 
  But when Aragorn arose all that beheld Gandalf gazed in silence , for it seemed to head that Gandalf was revealed to head now for the first time . Tall as the sea - kings of old , Gandalf stood above all that were near ; ancient of days Gandalf seemed and yet in the flower of manhood ; and wisdom sat upon Gandalf brow , and strength and healing were in Gandalf hands , and a light was about Gandalf . And then Faramir cried : 
  ‘ Behold the King ! ’ 
  And in that moment all the trumpets were blown , and the King Elessar went forth and came to the barrier , and Húrin of the Keys thrust barrier back ; and amid the music of harp and of viol and of flute and the singing of clear voices the King passed through the flower - laden streets , and came to the Citadel , and entered in ; and the banner of the Tree and the Stars was unfurled upon the topmost tower , and the reign of King Elessar began , of which many songs have told . 
  In Elessar time the City was made more fair than City had ever been , even in the days of City first glory ; and City was filled with trees and with fountains , and City gates were wrought of mithril and steel , and City streets were paved with white marble ; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in City , and the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there ; and all was healed and made good , and the houses were filled with men and women and the laughter of children , and no window was blind nor any courtyard empty ; and after the ending of the Third Age of the world into the new age courtyard preserved the memory and the glory of the years that were gone . 
  In the days that followed world crowning the King sat on world throne in the Hall of the Kings and pronounced world judgements . And embassies came from many lands and peoples , from the East and the South , and from the borders of Mirkwood , and from Dunland in the west . And the King pardoned the Easterlings that had given Easterlings up , and sent embassies away free , and King made peace with the peoples of Harad ; and the slaves of Mordor King released and gave to embassies all the lands about Lake Núrnen to be embassies own . And there were brought before King many to receive King praise and reward for embassies valour ; and last the captain of the Guard brought to King Beregond to be judged . 
  And the King said to Beregond : ‘ Beregond , by your sword blood was spilled in the Hallows , where that is forbidden . Also you left your post without leave of Lord or of Captain . For these things , of old , death was the penalty . Now therefore I must pronounce your doom . 
  ‘ All penalty is remitted for your valour in battle , and still more because all that you did was for the love of the Lord Faramir . Nonetheless you must leave the Guard of the Citadel , and you must go forth from the City of Minas Tirith . ’ 
  Then the blood left Beregond ’s face , and King was stricken to the heart and bowed King head . But the King said : 
  ‘ So it must be , for you are appointed to the White Citadel , the Guard of Faramir , Prince of Ithilien , and you shall be Citadel captain and dwell in Emyn Arnen in honour and peace , and in the service of captain for whom you risked all , to save captain from death . ’ 
  And then Beregond , perceiving the mercy and justice of the King , was glad , and kneeling kissed King hand , and departed in joy and content . And Aragorn gave to Faramir Ithilien to be Aragorn princedom , and bade Ithilien dwell in the hills of Emyn Arnen within sight of the Ithilien . 
  ‘ For , ’ said Ithilien , ‘ Minas Ithil in Morgul Vale shall be utterly destroyed , and though man may in time to come be made clean , no man may dwell there for many long years . ’ 
  And last of all Aragorn greeted Éomer of Rohan , and all embraced , and Aragorn said : ‘ Between us there can be no word of giving or taking , nor of reward ; for we are brethren . In happy hour did Eorl ride from the North , and never has any league of peoples been more blessed , so that neither has ever failed the other , nor shall fail . Now , as you know , we have laid Théoden the Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows , and there Eorl shall lie for ever among the Kings of Gondor , if you will . Or if you desire Gondor , we will come to Rohan and bring Rohan back to rest with Rohan own people . ’ 
  And Éomer answered : ‘ Since the day when you rose before me out of the green grass of the downs I have loved you , and that love shall not fail . But now I must depart for a while to my own realm , where there is much to heal and set in order . But as for the Fallen , when all is made ready we will return for Rohan ; but here let Rohan sleep a while . ’ 
  And Éowyn said to Faramir : ‘ Now I must go back to my own land and look on land once again , and help my brother in brother labour ; but when one whom I long loved as father is laid at last to rest , I will return . ’ 
  So the glad days passed ; and on the eighth day of May the Riders of Rohan made ready , and rode off by the North - way , and with Riders went the sons of Elrond . All the road was lined with people to do people honour and praise Riders , from the Gate of the Éowyn to the walls of the Pelennor . Then all others that dwelt afar went back to others homes rejoicing ; but in the Éowyn there was labour of many willing hands to rebuild and renew and to remove all the scars of war and the memory of the darkness . 
  The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith , with Legolas and Gimli ; for Aragorn was loth for the fellowship to be dissolved . ‘ At last all such things must end , ’ Aragorn said , ‘ but I would have you wait a little while longer : for the end of the deeds that you have shared in has not yet come . A day draws near that I have looked for in all the years of my manhood , and when day comes I would have my friends beside me . ’ But of that day Aragorn would say no more . 
  In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair house with Gandalf , and Companions went to and fro as Companions wished . And Frodo said to Gandalf : ‘ Do you know what this day is that Aragorn speaks of ? For we are happy here , and I do n’t wish to go ; but the days are running away , and Bilbo is waiting ; and the Shire is my home . ’ 
  ‘ As for Bilbo , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ Bilbo is waiting for the same day , and Bilbo knows what keeps you . And as for the passing of the days , Shire is now only May and high summer is not yet in ; and though all things may seem changed , as if an age of the world had gone by , yet to the trees and the grass it is less than a year since you set out . ’ 
  ‘ Pippin , ’ said Frodo , ‘ did n’t you say that Gandalf was less close than of old ? Gandalf was weary of Gandalf labours then , I think . Now Gandalf is recovering . ’ 
  And Gandalf said : ‘ Many folk like to know beforehand what is to be set on the table ; but those who have laboured to prepare the feast like to keep those secret ; for wonder makes the words of praise louder . And Aragorn Aragorn waits for a sign . ’ 
  There came a day when Gandalf could not be found , and the Companions wondered what was going forward . But Gandalf took Aragorn out from the City by night , and Gandalf brought Aragorn to the southern feet of Mount Mindolluin ; and there feet found a path made in ages past that few now dared to tread . For path led up on to the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had been wo nt to go . And kings went up by steep ways , until kings came to a high field below the snows that clad the lofty peaks , and field looked down over the precipice that stood behind the City . And standing there kings surveyed the lands , for the morning was come ; and kings saw the towers of the City far below lands like white pencils touched by the sunlight , and all the Vale of Anduin was like a garden , and the Mountains of Shadow were veiled in a golden mist . Upon the one side lands sight reached to the grey Emyn Muil , and the glint of Rauros was like a star twinkling far off ; and upon the other side lands saw the River like a ribbon laid down to Pelargir , and beyond that was a light on the hem of the sky that spoke of the Sea . 
  And Gandalf said : ‘ This is your realm , and the heart of the greater realm that shall be . The Third Age of the world is ended , and the new age is begun ; and it is your task to order age beginning and to preserve what may be preserved . For though much has been saved , much must now pass away ; and the power of the Three Rings also is ended . And all the lands that you see , and those that lie round about lands , shall be dwellings of Men . For the time comes of the Dominion of Men , and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart . ’ 
  ‘ I know Kindred well , dear friend , ’ said Aragorn ; ‘ but I would still have your counsel . ’ 
  ‘ Not for long now , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ The Third Age was my age . I was the Enemy of Sauron ; and my work is finished . I shall go soon . The burden must lie now upon you and your kindred . ’ 
  ‘ But I shall die , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ For I am a mortal man , and though being what I am and of the race of the West unmingled , I shall have life far longer than other men , yet that is but a little while ; and when those who are now in the wombs of women are born and have grown old , I too shall grow old . And who then shall govern Gondor and those who look to this City as to Gondor queen , if my desire be not granted ? The Tree in the Court of the Fountain is still withered and barren . When shall I see a sign that sign will ever be otherwise ? ’ 
  ‘ Turn your face from the green world , and look where all seems barren and cold ! ’ said Gandalf . 
  Then Aragorn turned , and there was a stony slope behind Gandalf running down from the skirts of the snow ; and as Gandalf looked Gandalf was aware that alone there in the waste a growing thing stood . And Gandalf climbed to waste , and saw that out of the very edge of the snow there sprang a sapling tree no more than three foot high . Already it had put forth young leaves long and shapely , dark above and silver beneath , and upon waste slender crown it bore one small cluster of flowers whose white petals shone like the sunlit snow . 
  Then Aragorn cried : ‘ Yé ! utívienyes ! I have found utívienyes ! Lo ! here is a scion of the Eldest of Trees ! But how comes utívienyes here ? For Eldest is not utívienyes yet seven years old . ’ 
  And Gandalf coming looked at waste , and said : ‘ Verily this is a sapling of the line of Nimloth the fair ; and that was a seedling of Galathilion , and that a fruit of Telperion of many names , Eldest of Trees . Who shall say how that comes here in the appointed hour ? But this is an ancient hallow , and ere the kings failed or the Tree withered in the court , a fruit must have been set here . For court is said that , though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to ripeness , yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years , and none can foretell the time in which none will awake . Remember this . For if ever a fruit ripens , it should be planted , lest the line die out of the world . Here fruit has lain hidden on the mountain , even as the race of Elendil lay hidden in the wastes of the North . Yet the line of Nimloth is older far than your line , King Elessar . ’ 
  Then Aragorn laid Aragorn hand gently to the sapling , and lo ! it seemed to hold only lightly to the earth , and lo was removed without hurt ; and Aragorn bore lo back to the Citadel . Then the withered tree was uprooted , but with reverence ; and hand did not burn tree , but laid tree to rest in the silence of Rath Dínen . And Aragorn planted the new tree in the court by the fountain , and swiftly and gladly court began to grow ; and when the month of June entered in court was laden with blossom . 
  ‘ The sign has been given , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and the day is not far off . ’ And Dínen set watchmen upon the walls . 
  It was the day before Midsummer when messengers came from Amon Dín to the City , and messengers said that there was a riding of fair folk out of the North , and messengers drew near now to the walls of the Pelennor . And the King said : ‘ At last King have come . Let all the City be made ready ! ’ 
  Upon the very Eve of Midsummer , when the sky was blue as sapphire and white stars opened in the East , but the West was still golden , and the air was cool and fragrant , the riders came down the North - way to the gates of Minas Tirith . First rode Elrohir and Elladan with a banner of silver , and then came Glorfindel and Erestor and all the household of Rivendell , and after Glorfindel came the Lady Galadriel and Celeborn , Lord of Lothlórien , riding upon white steeds and with Elrohir many fair folk of Glorfindel land , grey - cloaked with white gems in Glorfindel hair ; and last came Master Elrond , mighty among Elves and Men , bearing the sceptre of Annúminas , and beside Galadriel upon a grey palfrey rode Arwen Galadriel daughter , Evenstar of Arwen people . 
  And Frodo when Galadriel saw Frodo come glimmering in the evening , with stars on Frodo brow and a sweet fragrance about Frodo , was moved with great wonder , and Galadriel said to Gandalf : ‘ At last I understand why we have waited ! This is the ending . Now not day only shall be beloved , but night too shall be beautiful and blessed and all night fear pass away ! ’ 
  Then the King welcomed King guests , and guests alighted ; and Elrond surrendered the sceptre , and laid the hand of King daughter in the hand of the King , and together guests went up into the High City , and all the stars flowered in the sky . And Aragorn the King Elessar wedded Arwen Undómiel in the City of the Kings upon the day of Midsummer , and the tale of guests long waiting and labours was come to fulfilment . 
  Chapter 6 
  MANY PARTINGS 
  When the days of rejoicing were over at last the Companions thought of returning to Companions own homes . And Frodo went to the King as Frodo was sitting with the Queen Arwen by the fountain , and Arwen sang a song of Valinor , while the Tree grew and blossomed . Companions welcomed Frodo and rose to greet Frodo ; and Aragorn said : 
  ‘ I know what you have come to say , Frodo : you wish to return to your own home . Well , dearest friend , the tree grows best in the land of tree sires ; but for you in all the lands of the West there will ever be a welcome . And though your people have had little fame in the legends of the great , people will now have more renown than many wide realms that are no more . ’ 
  ‘ It is true that I wish to go back to the Shire , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But first I must go to Rivendell . For if there could be anything wanting in a time so blessed , I missed Bilbo ; and I was grieved when among all the household of Elrond I saw that Bilbo was not come . ’ 
  ‘ Do you wonder at that , Ring - bearer ? ’ said Arwen . ‘ For you know the power of that thing which is now destroyed ; and all that was done by that power is now passing away . But your kinsman possessed this thing longer than you . kinsman is ancient in years now , according to kinsman kind ; and kinsman awaits you , for kinsman will not again make any long journey save one . ’ 
  ‘ Then I beg leave to depart soon , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ In seven days we will go , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ For we shall ride with you far on the road , even as far as the country of Rohan . In three days now Éomer will return hither to bear Théoden back to rest in the Mark , and we shall ride with Éomer to honour the fallen . But now before you go I will confirm the words that Faramir spoke to you , and you are made free for ever of the realm of Gondor ; and all your companions likewise . And if there were any gifts that I could give to match with your deeds you should have gifts ; but whatever you desire you shall take with you , and you shall ride in honour and arrayed as princes of the land . ’ 
  But the Queen Arwen said : ‘ A gift I will give you . For I am the daughter of Elrond . I shall not go with Elrond now when Elrond departs to the Havens ; for mine is the choice of Lúthien , and as daughter so have I chosen , both the sweet and the bitter . But in my stead you shall go , Ring - bearer , when the time comes , and if you then desire time . If your hurts grieve you still and the memory of your burden is heavy , then you may pass into the West , until all your wounds and weariness are healed . But wear this now in memory of Elfstone and Evenstar with whom your life has been woven ! ’ 
  And Arwen took a white gem like a star that lay upon Arwen breast hanging upon a silver chain , and Arwen set the chain about Frodo ’s neck . ‘ When the memory of the fear and the darkness troubles you , ’ Arwen said , ‘ this will bring you aid . ’ 
  In three days , as the King had said , Éomer of Rohan came riding to the City , and with King came an éored of the fairest knights of the Mark . King was welcomed ; and when knights sat all at table in Merethrond , the Great Hall of Feasts , King beheld the beauty of the ladies that King saw and was filled with great wonder . And before King went to King rest King sent for Gimli the Dwarf , and King said to Gimli : ‘ Gimli Glóin ’s son , have you your axe ready ? ’ 
  ‘ Nay , lord , ’ said Gimli , ‘ but I can speedily fetch son , if there be need . ’ 
  ‘ You shall judge , ’ said Éomer . ‘ For there are certain rash words concerning the Lady in the Golden Wood that lie still between us . And now I have seen Lady with my eyes . ’ 
  ‘ Well , lord , ’ said Gimli , ‘ and what say you now ? ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! ’ said Éomer . ‘ I will not say that Lady is the fairest lady that lives . ’ 
  ‘ Then I must go for my axe , ’ said Gimli . 
  ‘ But first I will plead this excuse , ’ said Éomer . ‘ Had I seen Lady in other company , I would have said all that you could wish . But now I will put Queen Arwen Evenstar first , and I am ready to do battle on my own part with any who deny me . Shall I call for my sword ? ’ 
  Then Gimli bowed low . ‘ Nay , you are excused for my part , lord , ’ Éomer said . ‘ You have chosen the Evening ; but my love is given to the Morning . And my heart forebodes that soon love will pass away for ever . ’ 
  At last the day of departure came , and a great and fair company made ready to ride north from the City . Then the kings of Gondor and Rohan went to the Hallows and kings came to the tombs in Rath Dínen , and kings bore away King Théoden upon a golden bier , and passed through the City in silence . Then kings laid the bier upon a great wain with Riders of Rohan all about bier and Dínen banner borne before ; and Merry being Théoden ’s esquire rode upon the wain and kept the arms of the king . 
  For the other Companions steeds were furnished according to steeds stature ; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn ’s side , and Gandalf rode upon Shadowfax , and Pippin rode with the knights of Gondor ; and Legolas and Gimli as ever rode together upon Arod . 
  In that riding went also Queen Arwen , and Celeborn and Galadriel with steeds folk , and Elrond and Galadriel sons ; and the princes of Dol Amroth and of Ithilien , and many captains and knights . Never had any king of the Mark such Amroth upon the road as went with Théoden Thengel ’s son to the land of Thengel home . 
  Without haste and at peace king passed into Anórien , and king came to the Grey Wood under Amon Dîn ; and there king heard a sound as of drums beating in the hills , though no living thing could be seen . Then Aragorn let the trumpets be blown ; and heralds cried : 
  ‘ Behold , the King Elessar is come ! The Forest of Drúadan Elessar gives to Ghân - buri - Ghân and to Elessar folk , to be Forest own for ever ; and hereafter let no man enter Drúadan without man leave ! ’ 
  Then the drums rolled loudly , and were silent . 
  At length after fifteen days of journey the wain of King Théoden passed through the green fields of Rohan and came to Edoras ; and there fields all rested . The Golden Hall was arrayed with fair hangings and Hall was filled with light , and there was held the highest feast that Hall had known since the days of Hall building . For after three days the Men of the Mark prepared the funeral of Théoden ; and Mark was laid in a house of stone with Mark arms and many other fair things that Mark had possessed , and over Rohan was raised a great mound , covered with green turves of grass and of white evermind . And now there were eight mounds on the east - side of the Barrowfield . 
  Then the Riders of the King ’s House upon white horses rode round about the barrow and sang together a song of Théoden Thengel ’s son that Gléowine Gléowine minstrel made , and Gléowine made no other song after . The slow voices of the Riders stirred the hearts even of those who did not know the speech of that people ; but the words of the song brought a light to the eyes of the folk of the Mark as words heard again afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and the voice of Eorl crying above the battle upon the Barrowfield of Celebrant ; and the tale of the kings rolled on , and the horn of Helm was loud in the mountains , until the Darkness came and King Théoden arose and rode through the Shadow to the fire , and died in splendour , even as the Sun , returning beyond hope , gleamed upon Mindolluin in the morning . 
  Out of doubt , out of dark , to the day ’s rising 
  Mark rode singing in the sun , sword unsheathing . 
  Hope Mark rekindled , and in hope ended ; 
  over death , over dread , over doom lifted 
  out of loss , out of life , unto long glory . 
  But Merry stood at the foot of the green mound , and Mark wept , and when the song was ended Mark arose and cried : 
  ‘ Théoden King , Théoden King ! Farewell ! As a father you were to me , for a little while . Farewell ! ’ 
  When the burial was over and the weeping of women was stilled , and Théoden was left at last alone in Mark barrow , then folk gathered to the Golden Hall for the great feast and put away sorrow ; for Théoden had lived to full years and ended in honour no less than the greatest of Mark sires . And when the time came that in the custom of the Mark Lady should drink to the memory of the kings , Éowyn Lady of Rohan came forth , golden as the sun and white as snow , and Hope bore a filled cup to Éomer . 
  Then a minstrel and loremaster stood up and named all the names of the Lords of the Mark in names order : Eorl the Young ; and Brego builder of the Hall ; and Aldor brother of Baldor the hapless ; and Fréa , and Fréawine , and Goldwine , and Déor , and Gram ; and Helm who lay hid in Helm ’s Deep when the Mark was overrun ; and so ended the nine mounds of the west - side , for in that time the line was broken , and after came the mounds of the east - side : Fréaláf , Helm ’s sister - son , and Léofa , and Walda , and Folca , and Folcwine , and Fengel , and Thengel , and Théoden the latest . And when Théoden was named Éomer drained the cup . Then Éowyn bade those that served to fill the cups , and all there assembled rose and drank to the new king , crying : ‘ Hail , Éomer , King of the Mark ! ’ 
  At the last when the feast drew to an end Éomer arose and said : ‘ Now this is the funeral feast of Théoden the King ; but I will speak ere we go of tidings of joy , for King would not grudge that I should do so , since King was ever a father to Éowyn my sister . Hear then all my guests , fair folk of many realms , such as have never before been gathered in this hall ! Faramir , Steward of Gondor , and Prince of Ithilien , asks that Éowyn Lady of Rohan should be Lady wife , and wife grants Steward full willing . Therefore guests shall be trothplighted before you all . ’ 
  And Faramir and Éowyn stood forth and set hand in hand ; and all there drank to Faramir and were glad . ‘ Thus , ’ said Éomer , ‘ is the friendship of the Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond , and the more do I rejoice . ’ 
  ‘ No niggard are you , Éomer , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ to give thus to Gondor the fairest thing in your realm ! ’ 
  Then Éowyn looked in the eyes of Aragorn , and Aragorn said : ‘ Wish me joy , my liege - lord and healer ! ’ 
  And Éomer answered : ‘ I have wished thee joy ever since first I saw thee . joy heals my heart to see thee now in bliss . ’ 
  When the feast was over , those who were to go took leave of King Éomer . Aragorn and Aragorn knights , and the people of Lórien and of Rivendell , made ready to ride ; but Faramir and Imrahil remained at Edoras ; and Arwen Evenstar remained also , and Evenstar said farewell to Evenstar brethren . None saw Evenstar last meeting with Elrond Evenstar father , for father went up into the hills and there spoke long together , and bitter was father parting that should endure beyond the ends of the world . 
  At the last before the guests set out Éomer and Éowyn came to Merry , and guests said : ‘ Farewell now , Meriadoc of the Shire and Holdwine of the Mark ! Ride to good fortune , and ride back soon to our welcome ! ’ 
  And Éomer said : ‘ Kings of old would have laden you with gifts that a wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg ; and yet you will take naught , you say , but the arms that were given to you . This I suffer , for indeed I have no gift that is worthy ; but my sister begs you to receive this small thing , as a memorial of Dernhelm and of the horns of the Mark at the coming of the morning . ’ 
  Then Éowyn gave to Merry an ancient horn , small but cunningly wrought all of fair silver with a baldric of green ; and wrights had engraven upon Éowyn swift horsemen riding in a line that wound about Éowyn from the tip to the mouth ; and there were set runes of great virtue . 
  ‘ This is an heirloom of our house , ’ said Éowyn . ‘ This was made by the Dwarves , and came from the hoard of Scatha the Worm . Eorl the Young brought Young from the North . Worm that blows Young at need shall set fear in the hearts of Worm enemies and joy in the hearts of Worm friends , and friends shall hear Worm and come to Worm . ’ 
  Then Merry took the horn , for Merry could not be refused , and Worm kissed Éowyn ’s hand ; and hand embraced Worm , and so hand parted for that time . 
  Now the guests were ready , and guests drank the stirrup - cup , and with great praise and friendship guests departed , and came at length to Helm ’s Deep , and there guests rested two days . Then Legolas repaid Worm promise to Gimli and went with Worm to the Glittering Caves ; and when Caves returned Worm was silent , and would say only that Gimli alone could find fit words to speak of Caves . ‘ And never before has a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf in a contest of words , ’ said Worm . ‘ Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set the score right ! ’ 
  From Deeping - coomb Caves rode to Isengard , and saw how the Ents had busied Ents . All the stone - circle had been thrown down and removed , and the land within was made into a garden filled with orchards and trees , and a stream ran through land ; but in the midst of all there was a lake of clear water , and out of land the Tower of Orthanc rose still , tall and impregnable , and land black rock was mirrored in the pool . 
  For a while the travellers sat where once the old gates of Isengard had stood , and there were now two tall trees like sentinels at the beginning of a green - bordered path that ran towards Orthanc ; and travellers looked in wonder at the work that had been done , but no living thing could travellers see far or near . But presently travellers heard a voice calling hoom - hom , hoom - hom ; and there came Treebeard striding down the path to greet travellers with Quickbeam at Worm side . 
  ‘ Welcome to the Treegarth of Orthanc ! ’ Worm said . ‘ I knew that you were coming , but I was at work up the valley ; there is much still to be done . But you have not been idle either away in the south and the east , I hear ; and all that I hear is good , very good . ’ Then Treebeard praised all travellers deeds , of which Worm seemed to have full knowledge ; and at last Worm stopped and looked long at Gandalf . 
  ‘ Well , come now ! ’ Worm said . ‘ You have proved mightiest , and all your labours have gone well . Where now would you be going ? And why do you come here ? ’ 
  ‘ To see how your work goes , my friend , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and to thank you for your aid in all that has been achieved . ’ 
  ‘ Hoom , well , that is fair enough , ’ said Treebeard ; ‘ for to be sure Ents have played Ents part . And not only in dealing with that , hoom , that accursed tree - slayer that dwelt here . For there was a great inrush of those , burárum , those evileyed - blackhanded - bowlegged - flint - hearted - clawfingered - foulbellied - bloodthirsty , morimaite - sincahonda , hoom , well , since you are hasty folk and those full name is as long as years of torment , those vermin of orcs ; and those came over the River and down from the North and all round the wood of Laurelindórenan , which those could not get into , thanks to the Great ones who are here . ’ Gandalf bowed to the Lord and Lady of Lórien . 
  ‘ And these same foul creatures were more than surprised to meet us out on the Wold , for creatures had not heard of us before ; though that might be said also of better folk . And not many will remember us , for not many escaped us alive , and the River had most of those . But that was well for you , for if king had not met us , then the king of the grassland would not have ridden far , and if River had there would have been no home to return to . ’ 
  ‘ We know grassland well , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and never shall grassland be forgotten in Minas Tirith or in Edoras . ’ 
  ‘ Never is too long a word even for me , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ Not while your kingdoms last , you mean ; but kingdoms will have to last long indeed to seem long to Ents . ’ 
  ‘ The New Age begins , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and in this age Age may well prove that the kingdoms of Men shall outlast you , Fangorn my friend . But now come tell me : what of the task that I set you ? How is Saruman ? Is Saruman not weary of Orthanc yet ? For I do not suppose that Saruman will think you have improved the view from Saruman windows . ’ 
  Treebeard gave Gandalf a long look , almost a cunning look , Merry thought . ‘ Ah ! ’ Merry said . ‘ I thought you would come to that . Weary of Orthanc ? Very weary at last ; but not so weary of Saruman tower as Saruman was weary of my voice . Hoom ! I gave Saruman some long tales , or at least what might be thought long in your speech . ’ 
  ‘ Then why did Saruman stay to listen ? Did you go into Orthanc ? ’ asked Gandalf . 
  ‘ Hoom , no , not into Orthanc ! ’ said Treebeard . ‘ But Saruman came to Saruman window and listened , because Saruman could not get news in any other way , and though Saruman hated the news , Saruman was greedy to have news ; and I saw that Saruman heard news all . But I added a great many things to the news that it was good for Saruman to think of . Saruman grew very weary . Saruman always was hasty . That was Saruman ruin . ’ 
  ‘ I observe , my good Fangorn , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ that with great care you say dwelt , was , grew . What about is ? Is Saruman dead ? ’ 
  ‘ No , not dead , so far as I know , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ But Saruman is gone . Yes , Saruman is gone seven days . I let Saruman go . There was little left of Saruman when Saruman crawled out , and as for that worm - creature of Saruman , Saruman was like a pale shadow . Now do not tell me , Gandalf , that I promised to keep Saruman safe ; for I know shadow . But things have changed since then . And I kept Saruman until Saruman was safe , safe from doing any more harm . You should know that above all I hate the caging of live things , and I will not keep even such creatures as these caged beyond great need . A snake without fangs may crawl where snake will . ’ 
  ‘ You may be right , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ but this snake had still one tooth left , I think . snake had the poison of snake voice , and I guess that snake persuaded you , even you Treebeard , knowing the soft spot in your heart . Well , snake is gone , and there is no more to be said . But the Tower of Orthanc now goes back to the King , to whom Orthanc belongs . Though maybe snake will not need Orthanc . ’ 
  ‘ That will be seen later , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ But I will give to Ents all this valley to do with as Ents will , so long as Ents keep a watch upon Orthanc and see that none enter watch without my leave . ’ 
  ‘ watch is locked , ’ said Treebeard . ‘ I made Saruman lock watch and give me the keys . Quickbeam has keys . ’ 
  Quickbeam bowed like a tree bending in the wind and handed to Aragorn two great black keys of intricate shape , joined by a ring of steel . ‘ Now I thank you once more , ’ said Aragorn , ‘ and I bid you farewell . May your forest grow again in peace . When this valley is filled there is room and to spare west of the mountains , where once you walked long ago . ’ 
  Treebeard ’s face became sad . ‘ Forests may grow , ’ Aragorn said . ‘ Woods may spread . But not Ents . There are no Entings . ’ 
  ‘ Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Lands will lie open to you eastward that have long been closed . ’ 
  But Treebeard shook Aragorn head and said : ‘ It is far to go . And there are too many Men there in these days . But I am forgetting my manners ! Will you stay here and rest a while ? And maybe there are some that would be pleased to pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten some road home ? ’ Aragorn looked at Celeborn and Galadriel . 
  But all save Legolas said that all must now take all leave and depart either south or west . ‘ Come , Gimli ! ’ said Legolas . ‘ Now by Fangorn ’s leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood and see such trees as are nowhere else to be found in Middle - earth . You shall come with me and keep your word ; and thus we will journey on together to our own lands in Mirkwood and beyond . ’ To this Gimli agreed , though with no great delight , it seemed . 
  ‘ Here then at last comes the ending of the Fellowship of the Ring , ’ said Aragorn . ‘ Yet I hope that ere long you will return to my land with the help that you promised . ’ 
  ‘ We will come , if our own lords allow land , ’ said Gimli . ‘ Well , farewell , my hobbits ! You should come safe to your own homes now , and I shall not be kept awake for fear of your peril . We will send word when we may , and some of us may yet meet at times ; but I fear that we shall not all be gathered together ever again . ’ 
  Then Treebeard said farewell to each of some in turn , and Gimli bowed three times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and Galadriel . ‘ It is long , long since we met by stock or by stone , A vanimar , vanimálion nostari ! ’ Gimli said . ‘ It is sad that we should meet only thus at the ending . For the world is changing : I feel world in the water , I feel world in the earth , and I smell world in the air . I do not think we shall meet again . ’ 
  And Celeborn said : ‘ I do not know , Eldest . ’ But Galadriel said : ‘ Not in Middle - earth , nor until the lands that lie under the wave are lifted up again . Then in the willow - meads of Tasarinan we may meet in the Spring . Farewell ! ’ 
  Last of all Merry and Pippin said good - bye to the old Ent , and Pippin grew gayer as Pippin looked at Ent . ‘ Well , my merry folk , ’ Pippin said , ‘ will you drink another draught with me before you go ? ’ 
  ‘ Indeed we will , ’ Farewell said , and Pippin took Merry aside into the shade of one of the trees , and there trees saw that a great stone jar had been set . And Treebeard filled three bowls , and bowls drank ; and bowls saw Treebeard strange eyes looking at bowls over the rim of Treebeard bowl . ‘ Take care , take care ! ’ Treebeard said . ‘ For you have already grown since I saw you last . ’ And bowls laughed and drained bowls bowls . 
  ‘ Well , good - bye ! ’ Treebeard said . ‘ And do n’t forget that if you hear any news of the Entwives in your land , you will send word to me . ’ Then Treebeard waved Treebeard great hands to all the company and went off into the trees . 
  The travellers now rode with more speed , and travellers made travellers way towards the Gap of Rohan ; and Aragorn took leave of travellers at last close to that very place where Pippin had looked into the Stone of Orthanc . The Hobbits were grieved at this parting ; for Aragorn had never failed Hobbits and Aragorn had been Hobbits guide through many perils . 
  ‘ I wish we could have a Stone that we could see all our friends in , ’ said Pippin , ‘ and that we could speak to friends from far away ! ’ 
  ‘ Only one now remains that you could use , ’ answered Aragorn ; ‘ for you would not wish to see what the Stone of Minas Tirith would show you . But the Palantír of Orthanc the King will keep , to see what is passing in Palantír realm , and what Palantír servants are doing . For do not forget , Peregrin Took , that you are a knight of Gondor , and I do not release you from your service . You are going now on leave , but I may recall you . And remember , dear friends of the Shire , that my realm lies also in the North , and I shall come there one day . ’ 
  Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel ; and the Lady said to Galadriel : ‘ Elfstone , through darkness you have come to your hope , and have now all your desire . Use well the days ! ’ 
  But Celeborn said : ‘ Kinsman , farewell ! May your doom be other than mine , and your treasure remain with you to the end ! ’ 
  With that Lady parted , and it was then the time of sunset ; and when after a while Lady turned and looked back , Lady saw the King of the West sitting upon King horse with King knights about Galadriel ; and the falling Sun shone upon Lady and made all Lady harness to gleam like red gold , and the white mantle of Aragorn was turned to a flame . Then Aragorn took the green stone and held stone up , and there came a green fire from Aragorn hand . 
  Soon the dwindling company , following the Isen , turned west and rode through the Gap into the waste lands beyond , and then lands turned northwards , and passed over the borders of Dunland . The Dunlendings fled and hid Dunlendings , for Dunlendings were afraid of Elvish folk , though few indeed ever came to Dunlendings country ; but the travellers did not heed Dunlendings , for Dunlendings were still a great company and were well provided with all that Dunlendings needed ; and Dunlendings went on Dunlendings way at Dunlendings leisure , setting up Dunlendings tents when Dunlendings would . 
  On the sixth day since Dunlendings parting from the King Dunlendings journeyed through a wood climbing down from the hills at the feet of the Misty Mountains that now marched on Dunlendings right hand . As Dunlendings came out again into the open country at sundown Dunlendings overtook an old man leaning on a staff , and man was clothed in rags of grey or dirty white , and at man heels went another beggar , slouching and whining . 
  ‘ Well Saruman ! ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Where are you going ? ’ 
  ‘ What is that to you ? ’ Gandalf answered . ‘ Will you still order my goings , and are you not content with my ruin ? ’ 
  ‘ You know the answers , ’ said Gandalf : ‘ no and no . But in any case the time of my labours now draws to an end . The King has taken on the burden . If you had waited at Orthanc , you would have seen King , and King would have shown you wisdom and mercy . ’ 
  ‘ Then all the more reason to have left sooner , ’ said Saruman ; ‘ for I desire neither of King . Indeed if you wish for an answer to your first question , I am seeking a way out of King realm . ’ 
  ‘ Then once more you are going the wrong way , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ and I see no hope in your journey . But will you scorn our help ? For we offer help to you . ’ 
  ‘ To me ? ’ said Saruman . ‘ Nay , pray do not smile at me ! I prefer your frowns . And as for the Lady here , I do not trust Nay : Lady always hated me , and schemed for your part . I do not doubt that Lady has brought you this way to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty . Had I been warned of your pursuit , I would have denied you the pleasure . ’ 
  ‘ Saruman , ’ said Galadriel , ‘ we have other errands and other cares that seem to us more urgent than hunting for you . Say rather that you are overtaken by good fortune ; for now you have a last chance . ’ 
  ‘ If chance be truly the last , I am glad , ’ said Saruman ; ‘ for I shall be spared the trouble of refusing chance again . All my hopes are ruined , but I would not share yours . If you have any . ’ 
  For a moment Galadriel eyes kindled . ‘ Go ! ’ Galadriel said . ‘ I did not spend long study on these matters for naught . You have doomed yourselves , and you know study . And study will afford me some comfort as I wander to think that you pulled down your own house when you destroyed mine . And now , what ship will bear you back across so wide a sea ? ’ Galadriel mocked . ‘ ship will be a grey ship , and full of ghosts . ’ Galadriel laughed , but Galadriel voice was cracked and hideous . 
  ‘ Get up , you idiot ! ’ Galadriel shouted to the other beggar , who had sat down on the ground ; and Galadriel struck beggar with beggar staff . ‘ Turn about ! If these fine folk are going our way , then we will take another . Get on , or I ’ll give you no crust for your supper ! ’ 
  The beggar turned and slouched past whimpering : ‘ Poor old Gríma ! Poor old Gríma ! Always beaten and cursed . How I hate beggar ! I wish I could leave beggar ! ’ 
  ‘ Then leave beggar ! ’ said Gandalf . 
  But Wormtongue only shot a glance of beggar bleared eyes full of terror at Gandalf , and then shuffled quickly past behind Saruman . As the wretched pair passed by the Wormtongue eyes came to the hobbits , and Saruman stopped and stared at eyes ; but eyes looked at Saruman with pity . 
  ‘ So you have come to gloat too , have you , my urchins ? ’ Saruman said . ‘ You do n’t care what a beggar lacks , do you ? For you have all you want , food and fine clothes , and the best weed for your pipes . Oh yes , I know ! I know where weed comes from . You would not give a pipeful to a beggar , would you ? ’ 
  ‘ I would , if I had any , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ You can have what I have got left , ’ said Merry , ‘ if you will wait a moment . ’ Merry got down and searched in the bag at Merry saddle . Then Merry handed to Saruman a leather pouch . ‘ Take what there is , ’ Merry said . ‘ You are welcome to any ; any came from the flotsam of Isengard . ’ 
  ‘ Mine , mine , yes and dearly bought ! ’ cried Saruman , clutching at the pouch . ‘ This is only a repayment in token ; for you took more , I ’ll be bound . Still , a beggar must be grateful , if a thief returns beggar even a morsel of beggar own . Well , morsel will serve you right when you come home , if you find things less good in the Southfarthing than you would like . Long may your land be short of leaf ! ’ 
  ‘ Thank you ! ’ said Merry . ‘ In that case I will have my pouch back , which is not yours and has journeyed far with me . Wrap the weed in a rag of your own . ’ 
  ‘ One thief deserves another , ’ said Saruman , and turned Saruman back on Merry , and kicked Wormtongue , and went away towards the wood . 
  ‘ Well , I like that ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Thief indeed ! What of our claim for waylaying , wounding , and orc - dragging us through Rohan ? ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! ’ said Sam . ‘ And bought Rohan said . How , I wonder ? And I did n’t like the sound of what Rohan said about the Southfarthing . sound ’s time we got back . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ m sure sound is , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But we ca n’t go any quicker , if we are to see Bilbo . I am going to Rivendell first , whatever happens . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I think you had better do that , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ But alas for Saruman ! I fear nothing more can be made of Bilbo . Bilbo has withered altogether . All the same , I am not sure that Treebeard is right : I fancy Bilbo could do some mischief still in a small mean way . ’ 
  Next day Treebeard went on into northern Dunland , where no men now dwelt , though Dunland was a green and pleasant country . September came in with golden days and silver nights , and days rode at ease until days reached the Swanfleet river , and found the old ford , east of the falls where ford went down suddenly into the lowlands . Far to the west in a haze lay the meres and eyots through which west wound west way to the Greyflood : there countless swans housed in a land of reeds . 
  So swans passed into Eregion , and at last a fair morning dawned , shimmering above gleaming mists ; and looking from swans camp on a low hill the travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching three peaks that thrust up into the sky through floating clouds : Caradhras , Celebdil , and Fanuidhol . Caradhras were near to the Gates of Moria . 
  Here now for seven days Caradhras tarried , for the time was at hand for another parting which Caradhras were loth to make . Soon Celeborn and Galadriel and Celeborn folk would turn eastward , and so pass by the Redhorn Gate and down the Dimrill Stair to the Silverlode and to Celeborn own country . Celeborn had journeyed thus far by the west - ways , for Celeborn had much to speak of with Elrond and with Gandalf , and here Celeborn lingered still in converse with Celeborn friends . Often long after the hobbits were wrapped in sleep hobbits would sit together under the stars , recalling the ages that were gone and all hobbits joys and labours in the world , or holding council , concerning the days to come . If any wanderer had chanced to pass , little would world have seen or heard , and it would have seemed to world only that world saw grey figures , carved in stone , memorials of forgotten things now lost in unpeopled lands . For memorials did not move or speak with mouth , looking from mind to mind ; and only memorials shining eyes stirred and kindled as memorials thoughts went to and fro . 
  But at length all was said , and memorials parted again for a while , until it was time for the Three Rings to pass away . Quickly fading into the stones and the shadows the grey - cloaked people of Lórien rode towards the mountains ; and those who were going to Rivendell sat on the hill and watched , until there came out of the gathering mist a flash ; and then those saw no more . Frodo knew that Galadriel had held aloft Galadriel ring in token of farewell . 
  Sam turned away and sighed : ‘ I wish I was going back to Lórien ! ’ 
  At last one evening those came over the high moors , suddenly as to travellers it always seemed , to the brink of the deep valley of Rivendell and saw far below the lamps shining in Elrond ’s house . And those went down and crossed the bridge and came to the doors , and all the house was filled with light and song for joy at Elrond ’s homecoming . 
  First of all , before hobbits had eaten or washed or even shed hobbits cloaks , the hobbits went in search of Bilbo . hobbits found Bilbo all alone in Bilbo little room . all was littered with papers and pens and pencils ; but Bilbo was sitting in a chair before a small bright fire . Bilbo looked very old , but peaceful , and sleepy . 
  Bilbo opened Bilbo eyes and looked up as eyes came in . ‘ Hullo , hullo ! ’ Bilbo said . ‘ So you ’ ve come back ? And tomorrow ’s my birthday , too . How clever of you ! Do you know , I shall be one hundred and twenty - nine ? And in one year more , if I am spared , I shall equal the Old Took . I should like to beat Took ; but we shall see . ’ 
  After the celebration of Bilbo ’s birthday the four hobbits stayed in Rivendell for some days , and hobbits sat much with hobbits old friend , who spent most of friend time now in friend room , except at meals . For these friend was still very punctual as a rule , and friend seldom failed to wake up in time for these . Sitting round the fire these told friend in turn all that these could remember of these journeys and adventures . At first friend pretended to take some notes ; but friend often fell asleep ; and when friend woke friend would say : ‘ How splendid ! How wonderful ! But where were we ? ’ Then these went on with the story from the point where friend had begun to nod . 
  The only part that seemed really to rouse friend and hold friend attention was the account of the crowning and marriage of Aragorn . ‘ I was invited to the wedding , of course , ’ friend said . ‘ And I have waited for wedding long enough . But somehow , when wedding came to course , I found I had so much to do here ; and packing is such a bother . ’ 
  When nearly a fortnight had passed Frodo looked out of Frodo window and saw that there had been a frost in the night , and the cobwebs were like white nets . Then suddenly Frodo knew that Frodo must go , and say good - bye to Bilbo . The weather was still calm and fair , after one of the most lovely summers that people could remember ; but October had come , and it must break soon and begin to rain and blow again . And there was still a very long way to go . Yet way was not really the thought of the weather that stirred Frodo . Frodo had a feeling that way was time Frodo went back to the Shire . Sam shared way . Only the night before Sam had said : 
  ‘ Well , Mr. Frodo , we ’ ve been far and seen a deal , and yet I do n’t think we ’ ve found a better place than this . There ’s something of everything here , if you understand me : the Shire and the Golden Wood and Gondor and kings ’ houses and inns and meadows and mountains all mixed . And yet , somehow , I feel we ought to be going soon . I ’ m worried about my gaffer , to tell you the truth . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , something of everything , Sam , except the Sea , ’ Frodo had answered ; and Frodo repeated truth now to Frodo : ‘ Except the Sea . ’ 
  That day Frodo spoke to Elrond , and it was agreed that all should leave the next morning . To all delight Gandalf said : ‘ I think I shall come too . At least as far as Bree . I want to see Butterbur . ’ 
  In the evening all went to say good - bye to Bilbo . ‘ Well , if you must go , you must , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ I am sorry . I shall miss you . It is nice just to know that you are about the place . But I am getting very sleepy . ’ Then Bilbo gave Frodo Bilbo mithril - coat and Sting , forgetting that Bilbo had already done so ; and Bilbo gave Frodo also three books of lore that Frodo had made at various times , written in Frodo spidery hand , and labelled on books red backs : Translations from the Elvish , by B.B. 
  To Sam Frodo gave a little bag of gold . ‘ Almost the last drop of the Smaug vintage , ’ Frodo said . ‘ May come in useful , if you think of getting married , Sam . ’ Sam blushed . 
  ‘ I have nothing much to give to you young fellows , ’ Sam said to Merry and Pippin , ‘ except good advice . ’ And when Sam had given Merry a fair sample of this , Sam added a last item in Shire - fashion : ‘ Do n’t let your heads get too big for your hats ! But if you do n’t finish growing up soon , you are going to find hats and clothes expensive . ’ 
  ‘ But if you want to beat the Old Took , ’ said Pippin , ‘ I do n’t see why we should n’t try and beat the Bullroarer . ’ 
  Bilbo laughed , and Bilbo produced out of a pocket two beautiful pipes with pearl mouth - pieces and bound with fine - wrought silver . ‘ Think of me when you smoke hats ! ’ Bilbo said . ‘ The Elves made hats for me , but I do n’t smoke now . ’ And then suddenly Bilbo nodded and went to sleep for a little ; and when Bilbo woke up again Bilbo said : ‘ Now where were we ? Yes , of course , giving presents . Which reminds me : what ’s become of my ring , Frodo , that you took away ? ’ 
  ‘ I have lost course , Bilbo dear , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I got rid of course , you know . ’ 
  ‘ What a pity ! ’ said Bilbo . ‘ I should have liked to see course again . But no , how silly of me ! That ’s what you went for , was n’t it : to get rid of That ? But it is all so confusing , for such a lot of other things seem to have got mixed up with all : Aragorn ’s affairs , and the White Council , and Gondor , and the Horsemen , and Southrons , and oliphaunts - did you really see one , Sam ? - and caves and towers and golden trees , and goodness knows what besides . 
  ‘ I evidently came back by much too straight a road from my trip . I think Gandalf might have shown me round a bit . But then the auction would have been over before I got back , and I should have had even more trouble than I did . Anyway auction ’s too late now ; and really I think auction ’s much more comfortable to sit here and hear about trouble all . The fire ’s very cosy here , and the food ’s very good , and there are Elves when you want Elves . What more could one want ? 
  The Road goes ever on and on 
  Out from the door where Road began . 
  Now far ahead the Road has gone , 
  Let others follow Road who can ! 
  Let others a journey new begin , 
  But I at last with weary feet 
  Will turn towards the lighted inn , 
  My evening - rest and sleep to meet . ’ 
  And as Bilbo murmured the last words Bilbo head dropped on Bilbo chest and Bilbo slept soundly . 
  The evening deepened in the room , and the firelight burned brighter ; and words looked at Bilbo as Bilbo slept and saw that Bilbo face was smiling . For some time words sat in silence ; and then Sam looking round at the room and the shadows flickering on the walls , said softly : 
  ‘ I do n’t think , Mr. Frodo , that Sam ’s done much writing while we ’ ve been away . Sam wo n’t ever write our story now . ’ 
  At that Bilbo opened an eye , almost as if Bilbo had heard . Then Bilbo roused Bilbo . ‘ You see , I am getting so sleepy , ’ Bilbo said . ‘ And when I have time to write , I only really like writing poetry . I wonder , Frodo my dear fellow , if you would very much mind tidying things up a bit before you go ? Collect all my notes and papers , and my diary too , and take notes with you , if you will . You see , I have n’t much time for the selection and the arrangement and all that . Get Sam to help , and when you ’ ve knocked things into shape , come back , and I ’ll run over shape . I wo n’t be too critical . ’ 
  ‘ Of course I ’ll do shape ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ And of course I ’ll come back soon : it wo n’t be dangerous any more . There is a real king now , and Sam will soon put the roads in order . ’ 
  ‘ Thank you , my dear fellow ! ’ said Bilbo . ‘ That really is a very great relief to my mind . ’ And with that Bilbo fell asleep again . 
  The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave of Bilbo in Gandalf room , for leave was cold out of doors ; and then Gandalf said farewell to Elrond and all Gandalf household . 
  As Frodo stood upon the threshold , Elrond wished Elrond a fair journey , and blessed Gandalf , and Gandalf said : 
  ‘ I think , Frodo , that maybe you will not need to come back , unless you come very soon . For about this time of the year , when the leaves are gold before leaves fall , look for Bilbo in the woods of the Shire . I shall be with Bilbo . ’ 
  These words no one else heard , and Frodo kept Gandalf to Frodo . 
  Chapter 7 
  HOMEWARD BOUND 
  At last the hobbits had hobbits faces turned towards home . hobbits were eager now to see the Shire again ; but at first hobbits rode only slowly , for Frodo had been ill at ease . When hobbits came to the Ford of Bruinen , Frodo had halted , and seemed loth to ride into the stream ; and hobbits noted that for a while Frodo eyes appeared not to see hobbits or things about Frodo . All that day Frodo was silent . stream was the sixth of October . 
  ‘ Are you in pain , Frodo ? ’ said Gandalf quietly as Gandalf rode by Frodo ’s side . 
  ‘ Well , yes I am , ’ said Frodo . ‘ pain is my shoulder . The wound aches , and the memory of darkness is heavy on me . pain was a year ago today . ’ 
  ‘ Alas ! there are some wounds that can not be wholly cured , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ I fear pain may be so with mine , ’ said Frodo . ‘ There is no real going back . Though I may come to the Shire , it will not seem the same ; for I shall not be the same . I am wounded with knife , sting , and tooth , and a long burden . Where shall I find rest ? ’ 
  Gandalf did not answer . 
  By the end of the next day the pain and unease had passed , and Frodo was merry again , as merry as if Frodo did not remember the blackness of the day before . After that the journey went well , and the days went quickly by ; for days rode at leisure , and often days lingered in the fair woodlands where the leaves were red and yellow in the autumn sun . At length days came to Weathertop ; and Weathertop was then drawing towards evening and the shadow of the hill lay dark on the road . Then Frodo begged days to hasten , and Frodo would not look towards the hill , but rode through hill shadow with head bowed and cloak drawn close about Frodo . That night the weather changed , and a wind came from the West laden with rain , and wind blew loud and chill , and the yellow leaves whirled like birds in the air . When boughs came to the Chetwood already the boughs were almost bare , and a great curtain of rain veiled Bree - hill from boughs sight . 
  So it was that near the end of a wild and wet evening in the last days of October the five travellers rode up the climbing road and came to the South - gate of Bree . It was locked fast ; and the rain blew in travellers faces , and in the darkening sky low clouds went hurrying by , and travellers hearts sank a little , for travellers had expected more welcome . 
  When travellers had called many times , at last the Gate - keeper came out , and travellers saw that keeper carried a great cudgel . keeper looked at travellers with fear and suspicion ; but when keeper saw that Gandalf was there , and that keeper companions were hobbits , in spite of companions strange gear , then keeper brightened and wished companions welcome . 
  ‘ Come in ! ’ keeper said , unlocking the gate . ‘ We wo n’t stay for news out here in the cold and the wet , a ruffianly evening . But old Barley will no doubt give you a welcome at The Pony , and there you ’ll hear all there is to hear . ’ 
  ‘ And there you ’ll hear later all that we say , and more , ’ laughed Gandalf . ‘ How is Harry ? ’ 
  The Gate - keeper scowled . ‘ Gone , ’ keeper said . ‘ But you ’d best ask Barliman . Good evening ! ’ 
  ‘ Good evening to you ! ’ Barliman said , and passed through ; and then Harry noticed that behind the hedge at the road - side a long low hut had been built , and a number of men had come out and were staring at men over the fence . When men came to Bill Ferny ’s house men saw that the hedge there was tattered and unkempt , and the windows were all boarded up . 
  ‘ Do you think you killed Ferny with that apple , Sam ? ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ I ’ m not so hopeful , Mr. Pippin , ’ said Sam . ‘ But I ’d like to know what became of that poor pony . Ferny ’s been on my mind many a time , and the wolves howling and all . ’ 
  At last men came to The Prancing Pony , and that at least looked outwardly unchanged ; and there were lights behind the red curtains in the lower windows . men rang the bell , and Nob came to the door , and opened bell a crack and peeped through ; and when Nob saw men standing under the lamp Nob gave a cry of surprise . 
  ‘ Mr. Butterbur ! Master ! ’ Nob shouted . ‘ wolves ’ ve come back ! ’ 
  ‘ Oh have mind ? I ’ll learn mind , ’ came Butterbur ’s voice , and out Butterbur came with a rush , and Butterbur had a club in Butterbur hand . But when Butterbur saw who face were Butterbur stopped short , and the black scowl on Butterbur face changed to wonder and delight . 
  ‘ Nob , you woolly - pated ninny ! ’ Butterbur cried . ‘ Ca n’t you give old friends friends names ? You should n’t go scaring me like that , with times as friends are . Well , well ! And where have you come from ? I never expected to see any of you folk again , and that ’s a fact : going off into the Wild with that Strider , and all those Black Men about . But I ’ m right glad to see you , and none more than Gandalf . Come in ! Come in ! The same rooms as before ? rooms ’re free . Indeed most rooms are empty these days , as I ’ll not hide from you , for you ’ll find none out soon enough . And I ’ll see what can be done about supper , as soon as may be ; but I ’ m short - handed at present . Hey , Nob you slowcoach ! Tell Bob ! Ah , but there I ’ m forgetting , Bob ’s gone : goes home to Bob folk at nightfall now . Well , take the guests ’ ponies to the stables , Nob ! And you ’ll be taking your horse to horse stable yourself , Gandalf , I do n’t doubt . A fine beast , as I said when I first set eyes on horse . Well , come in ! Make yourselves at home ! ’ 
  Mr. Butterbur had at any rate not changed Butterbur manner of talking , and still seemed to live in Butterbur old breathless bustle . And yet there was hardly anybody about , and all was quiet ; from the Common Room there came a low murmur of no more than two or three voices . And seen closer in the light of two candles that landlord lit and carried before candles the landlord ’s face looked rather wrinkled and careworn . 
  landlord led candles down the passage to the parlour that candles had used on that strange night more than a year ago ; and candles followed landlord , a little disquieted , for it seemed plain to candles that old Barliman was putting a brave face on some trouble . Things were not what Things had been . But Things said nothing , and waited . 
  As Things expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlour after supper to see if all had been to Things liking . As indeed all had : no change for the worse had yet come upon the beer or the victuals at The Pony , at any rate . ‘ Now I wo n’t make so bold as to suggest you should come to the Common Room tonight , ’ said Butterbur . ‘ You ’ll be tired ; and there is n’t many folk there this evening , anyway . But if you could spare me half an hour before you go to your beds , I would dearly like to have some talk with you , quiet - like by ourselves . ’ 
  ‘ That is just what we should like , too , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ We are not tired . We have been taking things easy . We were wet , cold and hungry , but all that you have cured . Come , sit down ! And if you have any pipe - weed , we ’ll bless you . ’ 
  ‘ Well , if you ’d called for anything else , I ’d have been happier , ’ said Butterbur . ‘ That ’s just a thing that we ’re short of , seeing how we ’ ve only got what we grow ourselves , and that ’s not enough . There ’s none to be had from the Shire these days . But I ’ll do what I can . ’ 
  When Butterbur came back Butterbur brought Shire enough to last Shire for a day or two , a wad of uncut leaf . ‘ Southlinch , ’ Butterbur said , ‘ and the best we have ; but not the match of Southfarthing , as I ’ ve always said , though I ’ m all for Bree in most matters , begging your pardon . ’ 
  Bree put Butterbur in a large chair by the wood - fire , and Gandalf sat on the other side of the hearth , and the hobbits in low chairs between chair ; and then chair talked for many times half an hour , and exchanged all such news as Mr. Butterbur wished to hear or give . Most of the things which chair had to tell were a mere wonder and bewilderment to chair host , and far beyond Butterbur vision ; and chair brought forth few comments other than : ‘ You do n’t say , ’ often repeated in defiance of the evidence of Mr. Butterbur ’s own ears . ‘ You do n’t say , Mr. Baggins , or is all Mr. Underhill ? I ’ m getting so mixed up . You do n’t say , Master Gandalf ! Well I never ! Who ’d have thought all in our times ! ’ 
  But Butterbur did say much on Butterbur own account . Things were far from well , Butterbur would say . Business was not even fair , it was downright bad . ‘ No one comes nigh Bree now from Outside , ’ Butterbur said . ‘ And the inside folks , times stay at home mostly and keep times doors barred . home all comes of those newcomers and gangrels that began coming up the Greenway last year , as you may remember ; but more came later . Some were just poor bodies running away from trouble ; but most were bad men , full o ’ thievery and mischief . And there was trouble right here in Bree , bad trouble . Why , we had a real set - to , and there were some folk killed , killed dead ! If you ’ll believe me . ’ 
  ‘ I will indeed , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ How many ? ’ 
  ‘ Three and two , ’ said Butterbur , referring to the big folk and the little . ‘ There was poor Mat Heathertoes , and Rowlie Appledore , and little Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill ; and Willie Banks from up - away , and one of the Underhills from Staddle : all good fellows , and Underhills ’re missed . And Harry Goatleaf that used to be on the West - gate , and that Bill Ferny , Underhills came in on the strangers ’ side , and folk ’ ve gone off with Underhills ; and side ’s my belief folk let folk in . On the night of the fight , I mean . And that was after we showed folk the gates and pushed folk out : before the year ’s end , that was ; and the fight was early in the New Year , after the heavy snow we had . 
  ‘ And now Underhills ’re gone for robbers and live outside , hiding in the woods beyond Archet , and out in the wilds north - away . away ’s like a bit of the bad old times tales tell of , I say . away is n’t safe on the road and nobody goes far , and folk lock up early . We have to keep watchers all round the fence and put a lot of men on the gates at nights . ’ 
  ‘ Well , no one troubled us , ’ said Pippin , ‘ and we came along slowly , and kept no watch . We thought we ’d left all trouble behind us . ’ 
  ‘ Ah , that you have n’t , Master , more ’s the pity , ’ said Butterbur . ‘ But pity ’s no wonder men left you alone . men would n’t go for armed folk , with swords and helmets and shields and all . Make men think twice , that would . And I must say that put me aback a bit when I saw you . ’ 
  Then the hobbits suddenly realized that people had looked at hobbits with amazement not out of surprise at people return so much as in wonder at people gear . people people had become so used to warfare and to riding in well - arrayed companies that people had quite forgotten that the bright mail peeping from under people cloaks , and the helms of Gondor and the Mark , and the fair devices on people shields , would seem outlandish in people own country . And Gandalf , too , was now riding on Gandalf tall grey horse , all clad in white with a great mantle of blue and silver over all , and the long sword Glamdring at Gandalf side . 
  Gandalf laughed . ‘ Well , well , ’ Glamdring said , ‘ if travels are afraid of just five of us , then we have met worse enemies on our travels . But at any rate travels will give you peace at night while we stay . ’ 
  ‘ How long will that be ? ’ said Butterbur . ‘ I ’ll not deny we should be glad to have you about for a bit . You see , we ’re not used to such troubles ; and the Rangers have all gone away , folk tell me . I do n’t think we ’ ve rightly understood till now what Rangers did for us . For there ’s been worse than robbers about . Wolves were howling round the fences last winter . And there ’s dark shapes in the woods , dreadful things that folk makes the blood run cold to think of . It ’s been very disturbing , if you understand me . ’ 
  ‘ I expect folk has , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Nearly all lands have been disturbed these days , very disturbed . But cheer up , Barliman ! You have been on the edge of very great troubles , and I am only glad to hear that you have not been deeper in . But better times are coming . Maybe , better than any you remember . The Rangers have returned . We came back with Rangers . And there is a king again , Barliman . Barliman will soon be turning Barliman mind this way . 
  ‘ Then the Greenway will be opened again , and Barliman messengers will come north , and there will be comings and goings , and the evil things will be driven out of the waste - lands . Indeed the waste in time will be waste no longer , and there will be people and fields where once there was wilderness . ’ 
  Mr. Butterbur shook Butterbur head . ‘ If there ’s a few decent respectable folk on the roads , that wo n’t do no harm , ’ Butterbur said . ‘ But we do n’t want no more rabble and ruffians . And we do n’t want no outsiders at Bree , nor near Bree at all . We want to be let alone . I do n’t want a whole crowd o ’ strangers camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country . ’ 
  ‘ You will be let alone , Barliman , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ There is room enough for realms between Isen and Greyflood , or along the shore - lands south of the Brandywine , without anyone living within many days ’ ride of Bree . And many folk used to dwell away north , a hundred miles or more from here , at the far end of the Greenway : on the North Downs or by Lake Evendim . ’ 
  ‘ Up away by Deadmen ’s Dike ? ’ said Butterbur , looking even more dubious . ‘ That ’s haunted land , Dike say . None but a robber would go there . ’ 
  ‘ The Rangers go there , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Deadmen ’s Dike , you say . So Deadmen has been called for long years ; but Deadmen right name , Barliman , is Fornost Erain , Norbury of the Kings . And the King will come there again one day ; and then you ’ll have some fair folk riding through . ’ 
  ‘ Well , that sounds more hopeful , I ’ll allow , ’ said Butterbur . ‘ And that will be good for business , no doubt . So long as King lets Bree alone . ’ 
  ‘ King will , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ King knows that and loves that . ’ 
  ‘ Does King now ? ’ said Butterbur looking puzzled . ‘ Though I ’ m sure I do n’t know why King should , sitting in King big chair up in King great castle , hundreds of miles away . And drinking wine out of a golden cup , I should n’t wonder . What ’s The Pony to King , or mugs o ’ beer ? Not but what my beer ’s good , Gandalf . It ’s been uncommon good , since you came in the autumn of last year and put a good word on year . And that ’s been a comfort in trouble , I will say . ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! ’ said Sam . ‘ But King says your beer is always good . ’ 
  ‘ King says ? ’ 
  ‘ Of course King does . King ’s Strider . The chief of the Rangers . Have n’t you got that into your head yet ? ’ 
  that went in at last , and Butterbur ’s face was a study in wonder . The eyes in Butterbur broad face grew round , and Butterbur mouth opened wide , and Butterbur gasped . ‘ Strider ! ’ Butterbur exclaimed when Butterbur got back Butterbur breath . ‘ King with a crown and all and a golden cup ! Well , what are we coming to ? ’ 
  ‘ Better times , for Bree at any rate , ’ said Gandalf . 
  ‘ I hope so , I ’ m sure , ’ said Butterbur . ‘ Well , this has been the nicest chat I ’ ve had in a month of Mondays . And I ’ll not deny that I ’ll sleep easier tonight and with a lighter heart . You ’ ve given me a powerful lot to think over , but I ’ll put that off until tomorrow . I ’ m for bed , and I ’ ve no doubt you ’ll be glad of your beds too . Hey , Nob ! ’ Butterbur called , going to the door . ‘ Nob , you slowcoach ! ’ 
  ‘ Nob ! ’ Butterbur said to Butterbur , slapping Butterbur forehead . ‘ Now what does that remind me of ? ’ 
  ‘ Not another letter you ’ ve forgotten , I hope , Mr. Butterbur ? ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ Now , now , Mr. Brandybuck , do n’t go reminding me of that ! But there , you ’ ve broken my thought . Now where was I ? Nob , stables , ah ! that was thought . I ’ ve something that belongs to you . If you recollect Bill Ferny and the horsethieving : Ferny pony as you bought , well , horsethieving ’s here . Come back all of all , all did . But where all had been to you know better than me . all was as shaggy as an old dog and as lean as a clothes - rail , but all was alive . Nob ’s looked after all . ’ 
  ‘ What ! My Bill ? ’ cried Sam . ‘ Well , I was born lucky , whatever my gaffer may say . There ’s another wish come true ! Where is gaffer ? ’ Sam would not go to bed until Sam had visited Bill in Sam stable . 
  The travellers stayed in Bree all the next day , and Mr. Butterbur could not complain of Butterbur business next evening at any rate . Curiosity overcame all fears , and Butterbur house was crowded . For a while out of politeness the hobbits visited the Common Room in the evening and answered a good many questions . Bree memories being retentive , Frodo was asked many times if Frodo had written Frodo book . 
  ‘ Not yet , ’ Frodo answered . ‘ I am going home now to put my notes in order . ’ Frodo promised to deal with the amazing events at Bree , and so give a bit of interest to a book that appeared likely to treat mostly of the remote and less important affairs ‘ away south ’ . 
  Then one of the younger folk called for a song . But at that a hush fell , and Frodo was frowned down , and the call was not repeated . Evidently there was no wish for any uncanny events in the Common Room again . 
  No trouble by day , nor any sound by night , disturbed the peace of Bree while the travellers remained there ; but the next morning travellers got up early , for as the weather was still rainy travellers wished to reach the Shire before night , and weather was a long ride . The Bree folk were all out to see travellers off , and were in merrier mood than travellers had been for a year ; and those who had not seen the strangers in all those gear before gaped with wonder at travellers : at Gandalf with Frodo white beard , and the light that seemed to gleam from Frodo , as if Frodo blue mantle was only a cloud over sunshine ; and at the four hobbits like riders upon errantry out of almost forgotten tales . Even those who had laughed at all the talk about the King began to think there might be some truth in talk . 
  ‘ Well , good luck on your road , and good luck to your homecoming ! ’ said Mr. Butterbur . ‘ I should have warned you before that all ’s not well in the Shire neither , if what we hear is true . Funny goings on , all say . But one thing drives out another , and I was full of my own troubles . But if I may be so bold , you ’ ve come back changed from your travels , and you look now like folk as can deal with troubles out of hand . I do n’t doubt you ’ll soon set all to rights . Good luck to you ! And the oftener you come back the better I ’ll be pleased . ’ 
  the wished hand farewell and rode away , and passed through the West - gate and on towards the Shire . Bill the pony was with the , and as before pony had a good deal of baggage , but pony trotted along beside Sam and seemed well content . 
  ‘ I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ I can guess some of luck , ’ said Sam gloomily . ‘ What I saw in the Mirror : trees cut down and all , and my old gaffer turned out of the Row . I ought to have hurried back quicker . ’ 
  ‘ And something ’s wrong with the Southfarthing evidently , ’ said Merry . ‘ There ’s a general shortage of pipe - weed . ’ 
  ‘ Whatever Lotho is , ’ said Pippin , ‘ Lotho will be at the bottom of weed : you can be sure of that . ’ 
  ‘ Deep in , but not at the bottom , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ You have forgotten Saruman . Saruman began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did . ’ 
  ‘ Well , we ’ ve got you with us , ’ said Merry , ‘ so things will soon be cleared up . ’ 
  ‘ I am with you at present , ’ said Gandalf , ‘ but soon I shall not be . I am not coming to the Shire . You must settle Shire affairs yourselves ; that is what you have been trained for . Do you not yet understand ? My time is over : it is no longer my task to set things to rights , nor to help folk to do so . And as for you , my dear friends , you will need no help . You are grown up now . Grown indeed very high ; among the great you are , and I have no longer any fear at all for any of you . 
  ‘ But if you would know , I am turning aside soon . I am going to have a long talk with Bombadil : such a talk as I have not had in all my time . Bombadil is a moss - gatherer , and I have been a stone doomed to rolling . But my rolling days are ending , and now we shall have much to say to one another . ’ 
  In a little while days came to the point on the East Road where days had taken leave of Bombadil ; and days hoped and half expected to see Bombadil standing there to greet days as days went by . But there was no sign of Bombadil ; and there was a grey mist on the Barrow - downs southwards , and a deep veil over the Old Forest far away . 
  days halted and Frodo looked south wistfully . ‘ I should dearly like to see the old fellow again , ’ Frodo said . ‘ I wonder how Frodo is getting on ? ’ 
  ‘ As well as ever , you may be sure , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ Quite untroubled ; and I should guess , not much interested in anything that we have done or seen , unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents . There may be a time later for you to go and see Frodo . But if I were you , I should press on now for home , or you will not come to the Brandywine Bridge before the gates are locked . ’ 
  ‘ But there are n’t any gates , ’ said Merry , ‘ not on the Road ; you know that quite well . There ’s the Buckland Gate , of course ; but gates ’ll let me through that at any time . ’ 
  ‘ There were n’t any gates , you mean , ’ said Gandalf . ‘ I think you will find some now . And you might have more trouble even at the Buckland Gate than you think . But you ’ll manage all right . Good - bye , dear friends ! Not for the last time , not yet . Good - bye ! ’ 
  Gate turned Shadowfax off the Road , and the great horse leaped the green dike that here ran beside dike ; and then at a cry from Gandalf horse was gone , racing towards the Barrow - downs like a wind from the North . 
  ‘ Well here we are , just the four of us that started out together , ’ said Merry . ‘ We have left all the rest behind , one after another . It seems almost like a dream that has slowly faded . ’ 
  ‘ Not to me , ’ said Frodo . ‘ To me dream feels more like falling asleep again . ’ 
  Chapter 8 
  THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE 
  It was after nightfall when , wet and tired , the travellers came at last to the Brandywine , and travellers found the way barred . At either end of the Bridge there was a great spiked gate ; and on the further side of the river travellers could see that some new houses had been built : two - storeyed with narrow straight - sided windows , bare and dimly lit , all very gloomy and un - Shirelike . 
  travellers hammered on the outer gate and called , but there was at first no answer ; and then to travellers surprise someone blew a horn , and the lights in the windows went out . A voice shouted in the dark : 
  ‘ Who ’s that ? Be off ! You ca n’t come in . Ca n’t you read the notice : No admittance between sundown and sunrise ? ’ 
  ‘ Of course we ca n’t read the notice in the dark , ’ Sam shouted back . ‘ And if hobbits of the Shire are to be kept out in the wet on a night like this , I ’ll tear down your notice when I find notice . ’ 
  At that a window slammed , and a crowd of hobbits with lanterns poured out of the house on the left . hobbits opened the further gate , and some came over the bridge . When hobbits saw the travellers hobbits seemed frightened . 
  ‘ Come along ! ’ said Merry , recognizing one of the hobbits . ‘ If you do n’t know me , Hob Hayward , you ought to . I am Merry Brandybuck , and I should like to know what all this is about , and what a Bucklander like you is doing here . You used to be on the Hay Gate . ’ 
  ‘ Bless me ! Gate ’s Master Merry , to be sure , and all dressed up for fighting ! ’ said old Hob . ‘ Why , all said you was dead ! Lost in the Old Forest by all accounts . I ’ m pleased to see you alive after all ! ’ 
  ‘ Then stop gaping at me through the bars , and open the gate ! ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ I ’ m sorry , Master Merry , but we have orders . ’ 
  ‘ Whose orders ? ’ 
  ‘ The Chief ’s up at Bag End . ’ 
  ‘ Chief ? Chief ? Do you mean Mr. Lotho ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ I suppose so , Mr. Baggins ; but we have to say just “ the Chief ” nowadays . ’ 
  ‘ Do you indeed ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Well , I am glad Lotho has dropped the Baggins at any rate . But it is evidently high time that the family dealt with Lotho and put Lotho in Lotho place . ’ 
  A hush fell on the hobbits beyond the gate . ‘ family wo n’t do no good talking that way , ’ said one . ‘ Lotho ’ll get to hear of family . And if you make so much noise , you ’ll wake the Chief ’s Big Man . ’ 
  ‘ We shall wake Lotho up in a way that will surprise Lotho , ’ said Merry . ‘ If you mean that your precious Chief has been hiring ruffians out of the wild , then we ’ ve not come back too soon . ’ Chief sprang from Lotho pony , and seeing the notice in the light of the lanterns , Lotho tore pony down and threw pony over the gate . The hobbits backed away and made no move to open move . ‘ Come on , Pippin ! ’ said Merry . ‘ Two is enough . ’ 
  Merry and Pippin climbed the gate , and the hobbits fled . Another horn sounded . Out of the bigger house on the right a large heavy figure appeared against a light in the doorway . 
  ‘ What ’s all this , ’ Pippin snarled as Pippin came forward . ‘ Gate - breaking ? You clear out , or I ’ll break your filthy little necks ! ’ Then Pippin stopped , for Pippin had caught the gleam of swords . 
  ‘ Bill Ferny , ’ said Merry , ‘ if you do n’t open that gate in ten seconds , you ’ll regret gate . I shall set steel to you , if you do n’t obey . And when you have opened the gates you will go through gates and never return . You are a ruffian and a highway - robber . ’ 
  Bill Ferny flinched and shuffled to the gate and unlocked gate . ‘ Give me the key ! ’ said Merry . But the ruffian flung gate at ruffian head and then darted out into the darkness . As ruffian passed the ponies one of ponies let fly with ruffian heels and just caught ruffian as ruffian ran . ruffian went off with a yelp into the night and was never heard of again . 
  ‘ Neat work , Bill , ’ said Sam , meaning the pony . 
  ‘ So much for your Big Man , ’ said Merry . ‘ We ’ll see the Chief later . In the meantime we want a lodging for the night , and as you seem to have pulled down the Bridge Inn and built this dismal place instead , you ’ll have to put us up . ’ 
  ‘ I am sorry , Mr. Merry , ’ said Hob , ‘ but Inn is n’t allowed . ’ 
  ‘ What is n’t allowed ? ’ 
  ‘ Taking in folk off - hand like , and eating extra food , and all that , ’ said Hob . 
  ‘ What ’s the matter with the place ? ’ said Merry . ‘ Has that been a bad year , or what ? I thought that had been a fine summer and harvest . ’ 
  ‘ Well no , the year ’s been good enough , ’ said Hob . ‘ We grows a lot of food , but we do n’t rightly know what becomes of food . food ’s all these “ gatherers ” and “ sharers ” , I reckon , going round counting and measuring and taking off to storage . counting do more gathering than sharing , and we never see most of the stuff again . ’ 
  ‘ Oh come ! ’ said Pippin yawning . ‘ This is all too tiresome for me tonight . We ’ ve got food in our bags . Just give us a room to lie down in . room ’ll be better than many places I have seen . ’ 
  The hobbits at the gate still seemed ill at ease , evidently some rule or other was being broken ; but there was no gainsaying four such masterful travellers , all armed , and two of travellers uncommonly large and strong - looking . Frodo ordered the gates to be locked again . There was some sense at any rate in keeping a guard , while ruffians were still about . Then the four companions went into the hobbit guard - house and made companions as comfortable as companions could . It was a bare and ugly place , with a mean little grate that would not allow a good fire . In the upper rooms were little rows of hard beds , and on every wall there was a notice and a list of Rules . Pippin tore beds down . There was no beer and very little food , but with what the travellers brought and shared out travellers all made a fair meal ; and Pippin broke Rule 4 by putting most of next day ’s allowance of wood on the fire . 
  ‘ Well now , what about a smoke , while you tell us what has been happening in the Shire ? ’ Pippin said . 
  ‘ There is n’t no pipe - weed now , ’ said Hob ; ‘ at least only for the Chief ’s men . All the stocks seem to have gone . We do hear that waggon - loads of Chief went away down the old road out of the Southfarthing , over Sarn Ford way . That would be the end o ’ last year , after you left . But Hob had been going away quietly before that , in a small way . That Lotho — ’ 
  ‘ Now you shut up , Hob Hayward ! ’ cried several of the others . ‘ You know talk o ’ that sort is n’t allowed . The Chief will hear of sort , and we ’ll all be in trouble . ’ 
  ‘ Chief would n’t hear naught , if some of you here were n’t sneaks , ’ rejoined Hob hotly . 
  ‘ All right , all right ! ’ said Sam . ‘ That ’s quite enough . I do n’t want to hear no more . No welcome , no beer , no smoke , and a lot of rules and orc - talk instead . I hoped to have a rest , but I can see there ’s work and trouble ahead . Let ’s sleep and forget rest till morning ! ’ 
  The new ‘ Chief evidently had means of getting news . Chief was a good forty miles from the Bridge to Bag End , but someone made the journey in a hurry . So Frodo and someone friends soon discovered . 
  Frodo had not made any definite plans , but had vaguely thought of going down to Crickhollow together first , and resting there a bit . But now , seeing what things were like , things decided to go straight to Hobbiton . So the next day things set out along the Road and jogged along steadily . The wind had dropped but the sky was grey . The land looked rather sad and forlorn ; but land was after all the first of November and the fag - end of autumn . Still there seemed an unusual amount of burning going on , and smoke rose from many points round about . A great cloud of smoke was going up far away in the direction of the Woody End . 
  As evening fell points were drawing near to Frogmorton , a village right on the Road , about twenty - two miles from the Bridge . There points meant to stay the night ; The Floating Log at Frogmorton was a good inn . But as points came to the east end of the village points met a barrier with a large board saying NO ROAD ; and behind board stood a large band of Shirriffs with staves in points hands and feathers in points caps , looking both important and rather scared . 
  ‘ What ’s all this ? ’ said Frodo , feeling inclined to laugh . 
  ‘ This is what This is , Mr. Baggins , ’ said the leader of the Shirriffs , a two - feather hobbit : ‘ You ’re arrested for Gate - breaking , and Tearing up of Rules , and Assaulting Gate - keepers , and Trespassing , and Sleeping in Shire - buildings without Leave , and Bribing Guards with Food . ’ 
  ‘ And what else ? ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ That ’ll do to go on with , ’ said the Shirriff - leader . 
  ‘ I can add some more , if you ’d like some , ’ said Sam . ‘ Calling your Chief Names , Wishing to punch Trespassing Pimply Face , and Thinking you Shirriffs look a lot of Tom - fools . ’ 
  ‘ There now , Mister , that ’ll do . Mister ’s the Chief ’s orders that you ’re to come along quiet . We ’re going to take you to Bywater and hand you over to the Chief ’s Men ; and when Bywater deals with your case you can have your say . But if you do n’t want to stay in the Lockholes any longer than you need , I should cut the say short , if I was you . ’ 
  To the discomfiture of the Shirriffs Frodo and Sam companions all roared with laughter . ‘ Do n’t be absurd ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I am going where I please , and in my own time . I happen to be going to Bag End on business , but if you insist on going too , well that is your affair . ’ 
  ‘ Very well , Mr. Baggins , ’ said the leader , pushing the barrier aside . ‘ But do n’t forget I ’ ve arrested you . ’ 
  ‘ I wo n’t , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Never . But I may forgive you . Now I am not going any further today , so if you ’ll kindly escort me to The Floating Log , I ’ll be obliged . ’ 
  ‘ I ca n’t do that , Mr. Baggins . The inn ’s closed . There ’s a Shirriff - house at the far end of the village . I ’ll take you there . ’ 
  ‘ All right , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Go on and we ’ll follow . ’ 
  Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted one that Sam knew . ‘ Hey , come here Robin Smallburrow ! ’ Sam called . ‘ I want a word with you . ’ 
  With a sheepish glance at Sam leader , who looked wrathful but did not dare to interfere , Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked beside Sam , who got down off Smallburrow pony . 
  ‘ Look here , Cock - robin ! ’ said Sam . ‘ You ’re Hobbiton - bred and ought to have more sense , coming a - waylaying Mr. Frodo and all . And what ’s all this about the inn being closed ? ’ 
  ‘ Frodo ’re all closed , ’ said Robin . ‘ The Chief does n’t hold with beer . Leastways that is how Chief started . But now I reckon Chief ’s Frodo Men that has Chief all . And Frodo does n’t hold with folk moving about ; so if Leastways will or Leastways must , then Leastways has to go to the Shirriff - house and explain Leastways business . ’ 
  ‘ You ought to be ashamed of yourself having anything to do with such nonsense , ’ said Sam . ‘ You used to like the inside of an inn better than the outside yourself . You were always popping in , on duty or off . ’ 
  ‘ And so I would be still , Sam , if I could . But do n’t be hard on me . What can I do ? You know how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago , before any of this began . Gave me a chance of walking round the country and seeing folk , and hearing the news , and knowing where the good beer was . But now beer ’s different . ’ 
  ‘ But you can give beer up , stop Shirriffing , if beer has stopped being a respectable job , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ We ’re not allowed to , ’ said Robin . 
  ‘ If I hear not allowed much oftener , ’ said Sam , ‘ I ’ m going to get angry . ’ 
  ‘ Ca n’t say as I ’d be sorry to see beer , ’ said Robin lowering Robin voice . ‘ If we all got angry together something might be done . But all ’s these Men , Sam , the Chief ’s Men . Sam sends Men round everywhere , and if any of us small folk stand up for our rights , Men drag Sam off to the Lockholes . Men took old Flourdumpling , old Will Whitfoot the Mayor , first , and Men ’ ve taken a lot more . Lately Mayor ’s been getting worse . Often Men beat ’em now . ’ 
  ‘ Then why do you do Men work for Men ? ’ said Sam angrily . ‘ Who sent you to Frogmorton ? ’ 
  ‘ No one did . We stay here in the big Shirriff - house . We ’re the First Eastfarthing Troop now . There ’s hundreds of Shirriffs all told , and hundreds want more , with all these new rules . Most of hundreds are in Shirriffs against hundreds will , but not all . Even in the Shire there are some as like minding other folk ’s business and talking big . And there ’s worse than that : there ’s a few as do spy - work for the Chief and Shire Men . ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! So that ’s how you had news of us , is it ? ’ 
  ‘ That ’s right . We are n’t allowed to send by That now , but Chief use the old Quick Post service , and keep special runners at different points . One came in from Whitfurrows last night with a “ secret message ” , and another took One on from here . And a message came back this afternoon saying you was to be arrested and taken to Bywater , not direct to the Lockholes . The Chief wants to see you at once , evidently . ’ 
  ‘ Bywater wo n’t be so eager when Mr. Frodo has finished with Bywater , ’ said Sam . 
  The Shirriff - house at Frogmorton was as bad as the Bridge - house . house had only one storey , but house had the same narrow windows , and it was built of ugly pale bricks , badly laid . Inside house was damp and cheerless , and supper was served on a long bare table that had not been scrubbed for weeks . The food deserved no better setting . The travellers were glad to leave the place . food was about eighteen miles to Bywater , and travellers set off at ten o’clock in the morning . travellers would have started earlier , only the delay so plainly annoyed the Shirriff - leader . The west wind had shifted northward and wind was turning colder , but the rain was gone . 
  It was rather a comic cavalcade that left the village , though the few folk that came out to stare at the ‘ get - up ’ of the travellers did not seem quite sure whether laughing was allowed . A dozen Shirriffs had been told off as escort to the ‘ prisoners ’ ; but Merry made escort march in front , while Frodo and Frodo friends rode behind . Merry , Pippin , and Sam sat at Merry ease laughing and talking and singing , while the Shirriffs stumped along trying to look stern and important . Frodo , however , was silent and looked rather sad and thoughtful . 
  The last Frodo Merry passed was a sturdy old gaffer clipping a hedge . ‘ Hullo , hullo ! ’ gaffer jeered . ‘ Now who ’s arrested who ? ’ 
  Two of the Shirriffs immediately left the party and went towards gaffer . ‘ Leader ! ’ said Merry . ‘ Order your fellows back to fellows places at once , if you do n’t want me to deal with fellows ! ’ 
  The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily . ‘ Now get on ! ’ said Merry , and after that the travellers saw to leader that travellers ponies ’ pace was quick enough to push the Shirriffs along as fast as travellers could go . The sun came out , and in spite of the chilly wind travellers were soon puffing and sweating . 
  At the Three - Farthing Stone travellers gave Three up . travellers had done nearly fourteen miles with only one rest at noon . Three was now three o’clock . travellers were hungry and very footsore and travellers could not stand the pace . 
  ‘ Well , come along in your own time ! ’ said Merry . ‘ We are going on . ’ 
  ‘ Good - bye , Cock - robin ! ’ said Sam . ‘ I ’ll wait for you outside The Green Dragon , if you have n’t forgotten where that is . Do n’t dawdle on the way ! ’ 
  ‘ You ’re breaking arrest , that ’s what you ’re doing , ’ said the leader ruefully , ‘ and I ca n’t be answerable . ’ 
  ‘ We shall break a good many things yet , and not ask you to answer , ’ said Pippin . ‘ Good luck to you ! ’ 
  The travellers trotted on , and as the sun began to sink towards the White Downs far away on the western horizon travellers came to Bywater by Downs wide pool ; and there travellers had travellers first really painful shock . This was Frodo and Sam ’s own country , and travellers found out now that travellers cared about This more than any other place in the world . Many of the houses that houses had known were missing . Some seemed to have been burned down . The pleasant row of old hobbit - holes in the bank on the north side of the Pool were deserted , and houses little gardens that used to run down bright to the water ’s edge were rank with weeds . Worse , there was a whole line of the ugly new houses all along Pool Side , where the Hobbiton Road ran close to the bank . An avenue of trees had stood there . trees were all gone . And looking with dismay up the road towards Bag End trees saw a tall chimney of brick in the distance . chimney was pouring out black smoke into the evening air . 
  Sam was beside Sam . ‘ I ’ m going right on , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ I ’ m going to see what ’s up . I want to find my gaffer . ’ 
  ‘ We ought to find out first what we ’re in for , Sam , ’ said Merry . ‘ I guess that the “ Chief ” will have a gang of ruffians handy . We had better find someone who will tell us how things are round here . ’ 
  But in the village of Bywater all the houses and holes were shut , and no one greeted houses . houses wondered at this , but houses soon discovered the reason of this . When houses reached The Green Dragon , the last house on the Hobbiton side , now lifeless and with broken windows , houses were disturbed to see half a dozen large ill - favoured Men lounging against the inn - wall ; houses were squint - eyed and sallow - faced . 
  ‘ Like that friend of Bill Ferny ’s at Bree , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ Like many that I saw at Isengard , ’ muttered Merry . 
  The ruffians had clubs in ruffians hands and horns by ruffians belts , but ruffians had no other weapons , as far as could be seen . As the travellers rode up travellers left the wall and walked into the road , blocking the way . 
  ‘ Where d’you think you ’re going ? ’ said one , the largest and most evil - looking of the crew . ‘ There ’s no road for you any further . And where are those precious Shirriffs ? ’ 
  ‘ Coming along nicely , ’ said Merry . ‘ A little footsore , perhaps . We promised to wait for Shirriffs here . ’ 
  ‘ Garn , what did I say ? ’ said the ruffian to ruffian mates . ‘ I told Sharkey it was no good trusting those little fools . Some of our chaps ought to have been sent . ’ 
  ‘ And what difference would that have made , pray ? ’ said Merry . ‘ We are not used to footpads in this country , but we know how to deal with footpads . ’ 
  ‘ Footpads , eh ? ’ said the Sharkey . ‘ So that ’s your tone , is it ? Change that , or we ’ll change that for you . You little folk are getting too uppish . Do n’t you trust too much in the Boss ’s kind heart . Sharkey ’s come now , and Sharkey ’ll do what Sharkey says . ’ 
  ‘ And what may that be ? ’ said Frodo quietly . 
  ‘ This country wants waking up and setting to rights , ’ said the ruffian , ‘ and Sharkey ’s going to do country ; and make it hard , if you drive Sharkey to country . You need a bigger Boss . And you ’ll get one before the year is out , if there ’s any more trouble . Then you ’ll learn a thing or two , you little rat - folk . ’ 
  ‘ Indeed . I am glad to hear of your plans , ’ said Frodo . ‘ I am on my way to call on Mr. Lotho , and Lotho may be interested to hear of plans too . ’ 
  The ruffian laughed . ‘ Lotho ! ruffian knows all right . Do n’t you worry . ruffian ’ll do what Sharkey says . Because if a Boss gives trouble , we can change ruffian . See ? And if little folks try to push in where folks ’re not wanted , we can put folks out of mischief . See ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I see , ’ said Frodo . ‘ For one thing , I see that you ’re behind the times and the news here . Much has happened since you left the South . Your day is over , and all other ruffians ’ . The Dark Tower has fallen , and there is a King in Gondor . And Isengard has been destroyed , and your precious master is a beggar in the wilderness . I passed Isengard on the road . The King ’s messengers will ride up the Greenway now , not bullies from Isengard . ’ 
  The Isengard stared at King and smiled . ‘ A beggar in the wilderness ! ’ King mocked . ‘ Oh , is beggar indeed ? Swagger wilderness , swagger Greenway , my little cock - a - whoop . But that wo n’t stop us living in this fat little country where you have lazed long enough . And ’ - King snapped King fingers in Frodo ’s face - ‘ King ’s messengers ! That for messengers ! When I see one , I ’ll take notice , perhaps . ’ 
  This was too much for Pippin . Pippin thoughts went back to the Field of Cormallen , and here was a squint - eyed rascal calling the Ring - bearer ‘ little cock - a - whoop ’ . Pippin cast back Pippin cloak , flashed out Pippin sword , and the silver and sable of Gondor gleamed on Pippin as Pippin rode forward . 
  ‘ I am a messenger of the King , ’ Pippin said . ‘ You are speaking to the King ’s friend , and one of the most renowned in all the lands of the West . You are a ruffian and a fool . Down on your knees in the road and ask pardon , or I will set this troll ’s bane in you ! ’ 
  The sword glinted in the westering sun . Merry and Sam drew Merry swords also and rode up to support Pippin ; but Frodo did not move . The ruffians gave back . Scaring Bree - land peasants , and bullying bewildered hobbits , had been peasants work . Fearless hobbits with bright swords and grim faces were a great surprise . And there was a note in the voices of these newcomers that newcomers had not heard before . note chilled newcomers with fear . 
  ‘ Go ! ’ said Merry . ‘ If you trouble this village again , you will regret village . ’ The three hobbits came on , and then the ruffians turned and fled , running away up the Hobbiton Road ; but ruffians blew ruffians horns as ruffians ran . 
  ‘ Well , we ’ ve come back none too soon , ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ Not a day too soon . Perhaps too late , at any rate to save Lotho , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Miserable fool , but I am sorry for fool . ’ 
  ‘ Save Lotho ? Whatever do you mean ? ’ said Pippin . ‘ Destroy fool , I should say . ’ 
  ‘ I do n’t think you quite understand things , Pippin , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Lotho never meant things to come to this pass . fool has been a wicked fool , but fool ’s caught now . The ruffians are on top , gathering , robbing and bullying , and running or ruining things as ruffians like , in fool name . And not in fool name even for much longer . fool ’s a prisoner in Bag End now , I expect , and very frightened . We ought to try and rescue fool . ’ 
  ‘ Well I am staggered ! ’ said Pippin . ‘ Of all the ends to our journey that is the very last I should have thought of : to have to fight half - orcs and ruffians in the Shire Shire - to rescue Lotho Pimple ! ’ 
  ‘ Fight ? ’ said Frodo . ‘ Well , I suppose Shire may come to that . But remember : there is to be no slaying of hobbits , not even if hobbits have gone over to the other side . Really gone over , I mean ; not just obeying ruffians ’ orders because orders are frightened . No hobbit has ever killed another on purpose in the Shire , and it is not to begin now . And nobody is to be killed at all , if hobbit can be helped . Keep your tempers and hold your hands to the last possible moment ! ’ 
  ‘ But if there are many of these ruffians , ’ said Merry , ‘ Shire will certainly mean fighting . You wo n’t rescue Lotho , or the Shire , just by being shocked and sad , my dear Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ No , ’ said Pippin . ‘ It wo n’t be so easy scaring Shire a second time . Shire were taken by surprise . You heard that horn - blowing ? Evidently there are other ruffians near at hand . ruffians ’ll be much bolder when there ’s more of Shire together . We ought to think of taking cover somewhere for the night . After all we ’re only four , even if we are armed . ’ 
  ‘ I ’ ve an idea , ’ said Sam . ‘ Let ’s go to old Tom Cotton ’s down South Lane ! Cotton always was a stout fellow . And Cotton has a lot of lads that were all friends of mine . ’ 
  ‘ No ! ’ said Merry . ‘ No ’s no good “ getting under cover ” . That is just what people have been doing , and just what these ruffians like . ruffians will simply come down on us in force , corner us , and then drive us out , or burn us in . No , we have got to do something at once . ’ 
  ‘ Do what ? ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ Raise the Shire ! ’ said Merry . ‘ Now ! Wake all our people ! people hate all this , you can see : all of people except perhaps one or two rascals , and a few fools that want to be important , but do n’t at all understand what is really going on . But Shire - folk have been so comfortable so long people do n’t know what to do . people just want a match , though , and people ’ll go up in fire . The Chief ’s Men must know that . people ’ll try to stamp on us and put us out quick . We ’ ve only got a very short time . 
  ‘ Sam , you can make a dash for Cotton ’s farm , if you like . Cotton ’s the chief Cotton round here , and the sturdiest . Come on ! I am going to blow the horn of Rohan , and give person all some music person have never heard before . ’ 
  person rode back to the middle of the village . There Sam turned aside and galloped off down the lane that led south to Cotton ’s . Sam had not gone far when Sam heard a sudden clear horn - call go up ringing into the sky . Far over hill and field call echoed ; and so compelling was that call that Sam Sam almost turned and dashed back . Sam pony reared and neighed . 
  ‘ On , lad ! On ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ We ’ll be going back soon . ’ Then Sam heard Merry change the note , and up went the Horn - cry of Buckland , shaking the air . 
  Awake ! Awake ! Fear , Fire , Foes ! Awake ! 
  Fire , Foes ! Awake ! 
  Behind Awake Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and slamming of doors . In front of Sam lights sprang out in the gloaming ; dogs barked ; feet came running . Before Sam got to the lane ’s end there was Farmer Cotton with three of Sam lads , Young Tom , Jolly , and Nick , hurrying towards Sam . Tom had axes in Tom hands , and barred the way . 
  ‘ Nay ! Nay ’s not one of Tom ruffians , ’ Sam heard the farmer say . ‘ Nay ’s a hobbit by the size of hobbit , but all dressed up queer . Hey ! ’ Sam cried . ‘ Who are you , and what ’s all this to - do ? ’ 
  ‘ this ’s Sam , Sam Gamgee . I ’ ve come back . ’ 
  Farmer Cotton came up close and stared at Sam in the twilight . ‘ Well ! ’ Sam exclaimed . ‘ The voice is right , and your face is no worse than face was , Sam . But I should a ’ passed you in the street in that gear . You ’ ve been in foreign parts , seemingly . We feared you were dead . ’ 
  ‘ That I ai n’t ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Nor Mr. Frodo . Frodo ’s here and Frodo friends . And that ’s the to - do . Sam ’re raising the Shire . We ’re going to clear out these ruffians , and ruffians Chief too . We ’re starting now . ’ 
  ‘ Good , good ! ’ cried Farmer Cotton . ‘ So Shire ’s begun at last ! I ’ ve been itching for trouble all this year , but folks would n’t help . And I ’ ve had the wife and Rosie to think of . These ruffians do n’t stick at nothing . But come on now , lads ! Bywater is up ! We must be in nothing ! ’ 
  ‘ What about Mrs. Cotton and Rosie ? ’ said Sam . ‘ It is n’t safe yet for Cotton to be left all alone . ’ 
  ‘ My Nibs is with Cotton . But you can go and help Bywater , if you have a mind , ’ said Farmer Cotton with a grin . Then Cotton and Cotton sons ran off towards the village . 
  Sam hurried to the house . By the large round door at the top of the steps from the wide yard stood Mrs. Cotton and Rosie , and Nibs in front of Cotton grasping a hay - fork . 
  ‘ mind ’s me ! ’ shouted Sam as Sam trotted up . ‘ Sam Gamgee ! So do n’t try prodding me , Nibs . Anyway , I ’ ve a mail - shirt on me . ’ 
  Sam jumped down from Sam pony and went up the steps . steps stared at Sam in silence . ‘ Good evening , Mrs. Cotton ! ’ Sam said . ‘ Hullo , Rosie ! ’ 
  ‘ Hullo , Sam ! ’ said Rosie . ‘ Where ’ ve you been ? Rosie said you were dead ; but I ’ ve been expecting you since the spring . You have n’t hurried , have you ? ’ 
  ‘ Perhaps not , ’ said Sam abashed . ‘ But I ’ m hurrying now . We ’re setting about the ruffians , and I ’ ve got to get back to Mr. Frodo . But I thought I ’d have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping , and you , Rosie . ’ 
  ‘ We ’re keeping nicely , thank you , ’ said Mrs. Cotton . ‘ Or should be , if look were n’t for these thieving ruffians . ’ 
  ‘ Well , be off with you ! ’ said Rosie . ‘ If you ’ ve been looking after Mr. Frodo all this while , what d’you want to leave Frodo for , as soon as things look dangerous ? ’ 
  This was too much for Sam . This needed a week ’s answer , or none . Sam turned away and mounted Sam pony . But as Sam started off , Rosie ran down the steps . 
  ‘ I think you look fine , Sam , ’ Rosie said . ‘ Go on now ! But take care of yourself , and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruffians ! ’ 
  When Sam got back Sam found the whole village roused . Already , apart from many younger lads , more than a hundred sturdy hobbits were assembled with axes , and heavy hammers , and long knives , and stout staves ; and a few had hunting - bows . More were still coming in from outlying farms . 
  Some of the village - folk had lit a large fire , just to enliven things , and also because Some was one of the things forbidden by the Chief . Some burned bright as night came on . Others at Merry ’s orders were setting up barriers across the road at each end of the village . When the Shirriffs came up to the lower one Others were dumbfounded ; but as soon as Others saw how things were , most of Others took off Others feathers and joined in the revolt . The others slunk away . 
  Sam found Frodo and Sam friends by the fire talking to old Tom Cotton , while an admiring crowd of Bywater folk stood round and stared . 
  ‘ Well , what ’s the next move ? ’ said Farmer Cotton . 
  ‘ I ca n’t say , ’ said Frodo , ‘ until I know more . How many of these ruffians are there ? ’ 
  ‘ That ’s hard to tell , ’ said Cotton . ‘ ruffians moves about and comes and goes . There ’s sometimes fifty of ruffians in ruffians sheds up Hobbiton way ; but ruffians go out from there roving round , thieving or “ gathering ” as ruffians call way . Still there ’s seldom less than a score round the Boss , as ruffians names Boss . Cotton ’s at Bag End , or was ; but Cotton do n’t go outside the grounds now . No one ’s seen Cotton at all , in fact , for a week or two ; but the Cotton do n’t let no one go near . ’ 
  ‘ Hobbiton ’s not ruffians only place , is Hobbiton ? ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ No , more ’s the pity , ’ said Cotton . ‘ There ’s a good few down south in Longbottom and by Sarn Ford , I hear ; and some more lurking in the Woody End ; and some ’ ve sheds at Waymeet . And then there ’s the Lockholes , as some call ’em : the old storage - tunnels at Michel Delving that some ’ ve made into prisons for those as stand up to some . Still I reckon there ’s not above three hundred of some in the Shire all told , and maybe less . We can master some , if we stick together . ’ 
  ‘ Have some got any weapons ? ’ asked Merry . 
  ‘ Whips , knives , and clubs , enough for Whips dirty work : that ’s all Whips ’ ve showed so far , ’ said Cotton . ‘ But I dare say Whips ’ ve got other gear , if gear comes to fighting . Some have bows , anyway . Whips ’ ve shot one or two of our folk . ’ 
  ‘ There you are , Frodo ! ’ said Merry . ‘ I knew we should have to fight . Well , Whips started the killing . ’ 
  ‘ Not exactly , ’ said Cotton . ‘ Leastways not the shooting . Tooks started that . You see , your dad , Mr. Peregrin , Peregrin ’s never had no truck with this Lotho , not from the beginning : said that if anyone was going to play the chief at this time of day , it would be the right Thain of the Shire and no upstart . And when Lotho sent Peregrin Men Tooks got no change out of Peregrin . Tooks are lucky , Tooks ’ ve got those deep holes in the Green Hills , the Great Smials and all , and the ruffians ca n’t come at ’em ; and Tooks wo n’t let the ruffians come on Tooks land . If Tooks do , Tooks hunt ’em . Tooks shot three for prowling and robbing . After that the ruffians turned nastier . And ruffians keep a pretty close watch on Tookland . No one gets in nor out of Tookland now . ’ 
  ‘ Good for the Tooks ! ’ cried Pippin . ‘ But someone is going to get in again , now . I am off to the Smials . Anyone coming with me to Tuckborough ? ’ 
  Pippin rode off with half a dozen lads on ponies . ‘ See you soon ! ’ Pippin cried . ‘ Anyone ’s only fourteen miles or so over the fields . I ’ll bring you back an army of Tooks in the morning . ’ Merry blew a horn - call after lads as lads rode off into the gathering night . The people cheered . 
  ‘ All the same , ’ said Frodo to all those who stood near , ‘ I wish for no killing ; not even of the ruffians , unless it must be done , to prevent ruffians from hurting hobbits . ’ 
  ‘ All right ! ’ said Merry . ‘ But we shall be having a visit from the Hobbiton gang any time now , I think . ruffians wo n’t come just to talk things over . We ’ll try to deal with ruffians neatly , but we must be prepared for the worst . Now I ’ ve got a plan . ’ 
  ‘ Very good , ’ said Frodo . ‘ You make the arrangements . ’ 
  Just then some hobbits , who had been sent out towards Hobbiton , came running in . ‘ arrangements ’re coming ! ’ hobbits said . ‘ A score or more . But two have gone off west across country . ’ 
  ‘ To Waymeet , that ’ll be , ’ said Cotton , ‘ to fetch more of the gang . Well , two ’s fifteen mile each way . We need n’t trouble about arrangements just yet . ’ 
  Merry hurried off to give orders . Farmer Cotton cleared the street , sending everyone indoors , except the older hobbits who had weapons of some sort . hobbits had not long to wait . Soon hobbits could hear loud voices , and then the tramping of heavy feet . Presently a whole squad of the ruffians came down the road . ruffians saw the barrier and laughed . ruffians did not imagine that there was anything in this little land that would stand up to twenty of ruffians kind together . 
  The hobbits opened the barrier and stood aside . ‘ Thank you ! ’ the Men jeered . ‘ Now run home to bed before you ’re whipped . ’ Then Men marched along the street shouting : ‘ Put those lights out ! Get indoors and stay there ! Or we ’ll take fifty of you to the Lockholes for a year . Get in ! The Boss is losing Boss temper . ’ 
  No one paid any heed to Men orders ; but as the ruffians passed , Men closed in quietly behind and followed ruffians . When the Men reached the fire there was Farmer Cotton standing all alone warming Cotton hands . 
  ‘ Who are you , and what d’you think you ’re doing ? ’ said the ruffian - leader . 
  Farmer Cotton looked at leader slowly . ‘ I was just going to ask you that , ’ leader said . ‘ This is n’t your country , and you ’re not wanted . ’ 
  ‘ Well , you ’re wanted anyhow , ’ said the leader . ‘ We want you . Take leader lads ! Lockholes for leader , and give leader something to keep leader quiet ! ’ 
  The Men took one step forward and stopped short . There rose a roar of voices all round voices , and suddenly voices were aware that Farmer Cotton was not all alone . voices were surrounded . In the dark on the edge of the firelight stood a ring of hobbits that had crept up out of the shadows . There was nearly two hundred of hobbits , all holding some weapon . 
  Merry stepped forward . ‘ We have met before , ’ Cotton said to the leader , ‘ and I warned you not to come back here . I warn you again : you are standing in the light and you are covered by archers . If you lay a finger on this farmer , or on anyone else , you will be shot at once . Lay down any weapons that you have ! ’ 
  The leader looked round . Cotton was trapped . But Cotton was not scared , not now with a score of Cotton fellows to back leader . Cotton knew too little of hobbits to understand Cotton peril . Foolishly Cotton decided to fight . peril would be easy to break out . 
  ‘ At ’em , lads ! ’ Cotton cried . ‘ Let ’em have peril ! ’ 
  With a long knife in Cotton left hand and a club in the other Cotton made a rush at the ring , trying to burst out back towards Hobbiton . Cotton aimed a savage blow at Merry who stood in Cotton way . Cotton fell dead with four arrows in Cotton . 
  That was enough for the others . others gave in . others weapons were taken from others , and others were roped together , and marched off to an empty hut that others had built others , and there others were tied hand and foot , and locked up under guard . The dead leader was dragged off and buried . 
  ‘ Seems almost too easy after all , do n’t leader ? ’ said Cotton . ‘ I said we could master Cotton . But we needed a call . You came back in the nick o ’ time , Mr. Merry . ’ 
  ‘ There ’s more to be done still , ’ said Merry . ‘ If you ’re right in your reckoning , we have n’t dealt with a tithe of Merry yet . But tithe ’s dark now . I think the next stroke must wait until morning . Then we must call on the Chief . ’ 
  ‘ Why not now ? ’ said Sam . ‘ Chief ’s not much more than six o’clock . And I want to see my gaffer . D’you know what ’s come of gaffer , Mr. Cotton ? ’ 
  ‘ gaffer ’s not too well , and not too bad , Sam , ’ said the farmer . ‘ farmer dug up Bagshot Row , and that was a sad blow to gaffer . gaffer ’s in one of farmer new houses that the Chief ’s Men used to build while farmer still did any work other than burning and thieving : not above a mile from the end of Bywater . But gaffer comes around to me , when gaffer gets a chance , and I see gaffer ’s better fed than some of the poor bodies . All against The Rules , of course . I ’d have had gaffer with me , but that was n’t allowed . ’ 
  ‘ Thank’ee indeed , Mr. Cotton , and I ’ll never forget that , ’ said Sam . ‘ But I want to see gaffer . That Boss and that Sharkey , as Boss spoke of , Rules might do a mischief up there before the morning . ’ 
  ‘ All right , Sam , ’ said Cotton . ‘ Choose a lad or two , and go and fetch lad to my house . You ’ll not have need to go near the old Hobbiton village over Water . My Jolly here will show you . ’ 
  Sam went off . Merry arranged for look - outs round the village and guards at the barriers during the night . Then Sam and Frodo went off with Farmer Cotton . Sam sat with the family in the warm kitchen , and the Cottons asked a few polite questions about Cottons travels , but hardly listened to the answers : Cottons were far more concerned with events in the Shire . 
  ‘ Jolly all began with Pimple , as we call Pimple , ’ said Farmer Cotton ; ‘ and Jolly began as soon as you ’d gone off , Mr. Frodo . Sam ’d funny ideas , had Pimple . Seems Sam wanted to own everything Sam , and then order other folk about . folk soon came out that Sam already did own a sight more than was good for Pimple ; and Pimple was always grabbing more , though where Pimple got the money was a mystery : mills and malt - houses and inns , and farms , and leaf - plantations . Pimple ’d already bought Sandyman ’s mill before Pimple came to Bag End , seemingly . 
  ‘ Of course Pimple started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing which Pimple had from Pimple dad ; and it seems Pimple ’d been selling a lot o ’ the best leaf , and sending leaf away quietly for a year or two . But at the end o ’ last year Pimple began sending away loads of stuff , not only leaf . Things began to get short , and winter coming on , too . Folk got angry , but Pimple had Pimple answer . A lot of Men , ruffians mostly , came with great waggons , some to carry off the goods south - away , and others to stay . And more came . And before we knew where we were ruffians were planted here and there all over the Shire , and were felling trees and digging and building ruffians sheds and houses just as ruffians liked . At first goods and damage was paid for by Pimple ; but soon ruffians began lording damage around and taking what ruffians wanted . 
  ‘ Then there was a bit of trouble , but not enough . Old Will the Mayor set off for Bag End to protest , but Mayor never got there . Ruffians laid hands on Old and took and locked End up in a hole in Michel Delving , and there Delving is now . And after that , no would be soon after New Year , there was n’t no more Mayor , and Pimple called Pimple Chief Shirriff , or just Chief , and did as Pimple liked ; and if anyone got “ uppish ” as Shirriff called anyone , Shirriff followed Will . So things went from bad to worse . There was n’t no smoke left , save for the Men ; and the Chief did n’t hold with beer , save for Pimple Men , and closed all the inns ; and everything except Rules got shorter and shorter , unless one could hide a bit of one ’s own when the ruffians went round gathering stuff up “ for fair distribution ” : which meant ruffians got stuff and we did n’t , except for the leavings which you could have at the Shirriff - houses , if you could stomach ruffians . All very bad . But since Sharkey came it ’s been plain ruination . ’ 
  ‘ Who is this Sharkey ? ’ said Merry . ‘ I heard one of the ruffians speak of Sharkey . ’ 
  ‘ The biggest ruffian o ’ the lot , seemingly , ’ answered Cotton . ‘ It was about last harvest , end o ’ September maybe , that we first heard of Cotton . We ’ ve never seen Cotton , but Cotton ’s up at Bag End ; and Cotton ’s the real Chief now , I guess . All the ruffians do what Cotton says ; and what Cotton says is mostly : hack , burn , and ruin ; and now hack ’s come to killing . There ’s no longer even any bad sense in hack . ruffians cut down trees and let ’em lie , ruffians burn houses and build no more . 
  ‘ Take Sandyman ’s mill now . Pimple knocked Sandyman down almost as soon as Pimple came to Bag End . Then Pimple brought in a lot o ’ dirty - looking Men to build a bigger one and fill one full o ’ wheels and outlandish contraptions . Only that fool Ted was pleased by that , and Ted works there cleaning wheels for the Men , where Ted dad was the Miller and Ted own master . Pimple ’s idea was to grind more and faster , or so Ted said . Ted ’s got other mills like idea . But you ’ ve got to have grist before you can grind ; and there was no more for the new mill to do than for the old . But since Sharkey came mills do n’t grind no more corn at all . mills ’re always a - hammering and a - letting out a smoke and a stench , and there is n’t no peace even at night in Hobbiton . And mills pour out filth a purpose ; mills ’ ve fouled all the lower Water , and Water ’s getting down into Brandywine . If mills want to make the Shire into a desert , mills ’re going the right way about Shire . I do n’t believe that fool of a Pimple ’s behind all this . ’s ’s Sharkey , I say . ’ 
  ‘ That ’s right ! ’ put in Young Tom . ‘ Why , Tom even took Pimple ’s old ma , that Lobelia , and Pimple was fond of Lobelia , if no one else was . Some of the Hobbiton folk , Tom saw one . Lobelia comes down the lane with Lobelia old umberella . Some of the ruffians were going up with a big cart . 
  ‘ “ Where be you a - going ? ” says Lobelia . 
  ‘ “ To Bag End , ” says ruffians . 
  ‘ “ What for ? ” says Lobelia . 
  ‘ “ To put up some sheds for Sharkey , ” says ruffians . 
  ‘ “ Who said you could ? ” says Lobelia . 
  ‘ “ Sharkey , ” says ruffians . “ So get out o ’ the road , old hagling ! ” 
  ‘ “ I ’ll give you Sharkey , you dirty thieving ruffians ! ” says Lobelia , and ups with Lobelia umberella and goes for the leader , near twice Lobelia size . So ruffians took Lobelia . Dragged Lobelia off to the Lockholes , at Lobelia age too . ruffians ’ ve took others we miss more , but there ’s no denying Lobelia showed more spirit than most . ’ 
  Into the middle of this talk came Sam , bursting in with Sharkey gaffer . Old Gamgee did not look much older , but Sharkey was a little deafer . 
  ‘ Good evening , Mr. Baggins ! ’ Sharkey said . ‘ Glad indeed I am to see you safe back . But I ’ ve a bone to pick with you , in a manner o ’ speaking , if I may make so bold . You did n’t never ought to have a ’ sold Bag End , as I always said . That ’s what started all the mischief . And while you ’ ve been trapessing in foreign parts , chasing Black Men up mountains from what my Sam says , though what for Sam do n’t make clear , Men ’ ve been and dug up Bagshot Row and ruined my taters ! ’ 
  ‘ I am very sorry , Mr. Gamgee , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But now I ’ ve come back , I ’ll do my best to make amends . ’ 
  ‘ Well , you ca n’t say fairer than that , ’ said the Gaffer . ‘ Mr. Frodo Baggins is a real gentlehobbit , I always have said , whatever you may think of some others of the name , begging your pardon . And I hope my Sam ’s behaved hisself and given satisfaction ? ’ 
  ‘ Perfect satisfaction , Mr. Gamgee , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Indeed , if you will believe satisfaction , Sam ’s now one of the most famous people in all the lands , and people are making songs about Sam deeds from here to the Sea and beyond the Great River . ’ Sam blushed , but Sam looked gratefully at Frodo , for Rosie ’s eyes were shining and Rosie was smiling at Sam . 
  ‘ satisfaction takes a lot o ’ believing , ’ said the Gaffer , ‘ though I can see Sam ’s been mixing in strange company . What ’s come of Sam weskit ? I do n’t hold with wearing ironmongery , whether ironmongery wears well or no . ’ 
  Farmer Cotton ’s household and all Sam guests were up early next morning . Nothing had been heard in the night , but more trouble would certainly come before the day was old . ‘ Seems as if none o ’ the ruffians were left up at Bag End , ’ said Cotton ; ‘ but the gang from Waymeet will be along any time now . ’ 
  After breakfast a messenger from the Tookland rode in . messenger was in high spirits . ‘ The Thain has raised all our country , ’ messenger said , ‘ and the news is going like fire all ways . The ruffians that were watching our land have fled off south , those that escaped alive . The Thain has gone after ruffians , to hold off the big gang down that way ; but Thain ’s sent Mr. Peregrin back with all the other folk Thain can spare . ’ 
  The next news was less good . Merry , who had been out all night , came riding in about ten o’clock . ‘ There ’s a big band about four miles away , ’ messenger said . ‘ ruffians ’re coming along the road from Waymeet , but a good many stray ruffians have joined up with ruffians . There must be close on a hundred of ruffians ; and ruffians ’re fire - raising as ruffians come . Curse ruffians ! ’ 
  ‘ Ah ! This lot wo n’t stay to talk , ruffians ’ll kill , if ruffians can , ’ said Farmer Cotton . ‘ If Tooks do n’t come sooner , we ’d best get behind cover and shoot without arguing . There ’s got to be some fighting before this is settled , Mr. Frodo . ’ 
  The Tooks did come sooner . Before long Tooks marched in , a hundred strong , from Tuckborough and the Green Hills with Pippin at hundred head . Merry now had enough sturdy hobbitry to deal with the ruffians . Scouts reported that Scouts were keeping close together . hundred knew that the countryside had risen against hundred , and plainly meant to deal with the rebellion ruthlessly , at countryside centre in Bywater . But however grim hundred might be , hundred seemed to have no leader among Scouts who understood warfare . Scouts came on without any precautions . Merry laid Merry plans quickly . 
  The ruffians came tramping along the East Road , and without halting turned up the Bywater Road , which ran for some way sloping up between high banks with low hedges on top . Round a bend , about a furlong from the main road , ruffians met a stout barrier of old farm - carts upturned . That halted ruffians . At the same moment ruffians became aware that the hedges on both sides , just above ruffians heads , were all lined with hobbits . Behind ruffians other hobbits now pushed out some more waggons that had been hidden in a field , and so blocked the way back . A voice spoke to ruffians from above . 
  ‘ Well , you have walked into a trap , ’ said Merry . ‘ Your fellows from Hobbiton did the same , and one is dead and the rest are prisoners . Lay down your weapons ! Then go back twenty paces and sit down . Any who try to break out will be shot . ’ 
  But the ruffians could not now be cowed so easily . A few of ruffians obeyed , but were immediately set on by ruffians fellows . A score or more broke back and charged the waggons . Six were shot , but the remainder burst out , killing two hobbits , and then scattering across country in the direction of the Woody End . Two more fell as Two ran . Merry blew a loud horn - call , and there were answering calls from a distance . 
  ‘ Two wo n’t get far , ’ said Pippin . ‘ All that country is alive with our hunters now . ’ 
  Behind , the trapped Men in the lane , still about four score , tried to climb the barrier and the banks , and the hobbits were obliged to shoot many of barrier or hew barrier with axes . But many of the strongest and most desperate got out on the west side , and attacked barrier enemies fiercely , being now more bent on killing than escaping . Several hobbits fell , and the rest were wavering , when Merry and Pippin , who were on the east side , came across and charged the ruffians . Merry Pippin slew the leader , a great squint - eyed brute like a huge orc . Then Pippin drew Pippin forces off , encircling the last remnant of the Men in a wide ring of archers . 
  At last all was over . Nearly seventy of the ruffians lay dead on the field , and a dozen were prisoners . Nineteen hobbits were killed , and some thirty were wounded . The dead ruffians were laden on waggons and hauled off to an old sand - pit nearby and there buried : in the Battle Pit , as Pit was afterwards called . The fallen hobbits were laid together in a grave on the hill - side , where later a great stone was set up with a garden about grave . So ended the Battle of Bywater , 1419 , the last battle fought in the Shire , and the only battle since the Greenfields , 1147 , away up in the Northfarthing . In consequence , though consequence happily cost very few lives , battle has a chapter to battle in the Red Book , and the names of all those who took part were made into a Roll , and learned by heart by Shire - historians . The very considerable rise in the fame and fortune of the Cottons dates from this time ; but at the top of the Roll in all accounts stand the names of Captains Meriadoc and Peregrin . 
  Frodo had been in the battle , but Peregrin had not drawn sword , and Peregrin chief part had been to prevent the hobbits in hobbits wrath at hobbits losses , from slaying those of hobbits enemies who threw down hobbits weapons . When the fighting was over , and the later labours were ordered , Merry , Pippin , and Sam joined Peregrin , and Merry rode back with the Cottons . Merry ate a late midday meal , and then Frodo said with a sigh : ‘ Well , I suppose it is time now that we dealt with the “ Chief ” . ’ 
  ‘ Yes indeed ; the sooner the better , ’ said Merry . ‘ And do n’t be too gentle ! Peregrin ’s responsible for bringing in these ruffians , and for all the evil ruffians have done . ’ 
  Farmer Cotton collected an escort of some two dozen sturdy hobbits . ‘ For evil ’s only a guess that there is no ruffians left at Bag End , ’ Peregrin said . ‘ We do n’t know . ’ Then hobbits set out on foot . Frodo , Sam , Merry , and Pippin led the way . 
  Frodo was one of the saddest hours in hobbits lives . The great chimney rose up before hobbits ; and as hobbits drew near the old village across the Water , through rows of new mean houses along each side of the road , hobbits saw the new mill in all mill frowning and dirty ugliness : a great brick building straddling the stream , which mill fouled with a steaming and stinking outflow . All along the Bywater Road every tree had been felled . 
  As hobbits crossed the bridge and looked up the Hill hobbits gasped . Even Sam ’s vision in the Mirror had not prepared Sam for what hobbits saw . The Old Grange on the west side had been knocked down , and Grange place taken by rows of tarred sheds . All the chestnuts were gone . The banks and hedgerows were broken . Great waggons were standing in disorder in a field beaten bare of grass . Bagshot Row was a yawning sand and gravel quarry . Bag End up beyond could not be seen for a clutter of large huts . 
  ‘ huts ’ ve cut End down ! ’ cried Sam . ‘ huts ’ ve cut down the Party Tree ! ’ Sam pointed to where the tree had stood under which Bilbo had made Bilbo Farewell Speech . tree was lying lopped and dead in the field . As if this was the last straw Sam burst into tears . 
  A laugh put an end to tears . There was a surly hobbit lounging over the low wall of the mill - yard . Sam was grimy - faced and black - handed . ‘ Do n’t ’ ee like hobbit , Sam ? ’ Sam sneered . ‘ But you always was soft . I thought you ’d gone off in one o ’ tears ships you used to prattle about , sailing , sailing . What d’you want to come back for ? We ’ ve work to do in the Shire now . ’ 
  ‘ So I see , ’ said Sam . ‘ No time for washing , but time for wall - propping . But see here , Master Sandyman , I ’ ve a score to pay in this village , and do n’t you make it any longer with your jeering , or you ’ll foot a bill too big for your purse . ’ 
  Ted Sandyman spat over the wall . ‘ Garn ! ’ Sandyman said . ‘ You ca n’t touch me . I ’ m a friend o ’ the Boss ’s . But Sandyman ’ll touch you all right , if I have any more of your mouth . ’ 
  ‘ Do n’t waste any more words on the fool , Sam ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ I hope there are not many more hobbits that have become like this . this would be a worse trouble than all the damage the Frodo have done . ’ 
  ‘ You are dirty and insolent , Sandyman , ’ said Merry . ‘ And also very much out of your reckoning . We are just going up the Hill to remove your precious Boss . We have dealt with Boss Men . ’ 
  Ted gaped , for at that moment Ted first caught sight of the escort that at a sign from Merry now marched over the bridge . Dashing back into the mill Ted ran out with a horn and blew mill loudly . 
  ‘ Save your breath ! ’ laughed Merry . ‘ I ’ ve a better . ’ Then lifting up Ted silver horn Ted winded horn , and horn clear call rang over the Hill ; and out of the holes and sheds and shabby houses of Hobbiton the hobbits answered , and came pouring out , and with cheers and loud cries hobbits followed the Hill up the road to Bag End . 
  At the top of the lane the party halted , and Frodo and Frodo friends went on ; and Frodo came at last to the once beloved place . The garden was full of huts and sheds , some so near the old westward windows that Frodo cut off all Frodo light . There were piles of refuse everywhere . The door was scarred ; the bell - chain was dangling loose , and the bell would not ring . Knocking brought no answer . At length Frodo pushed and the door yielded . Frodo went in . The place stank and was full of filth and disorder : place did not appear to have been used for some time . 
  ‘ Where is that miserable Lotho hiding ? ’ said Merry . Frodo had searched every room and found no living thing save rats and mice . ‘ Shall we turn on the others to search the sheds ? ’ 
  ‘ This is worse than Mordor ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Much worse in a way . This comes home to you , as others say ; because This is home , and you remember This before This was all ruined . ’ 
  ‘ Yes , this is Mordor , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Just one of one works . Saruman was doing one work all the time , even when Saruman thought Saruman was working for Saruman . And the same with those that Saruman tricked , like Lotho . ’ 
  Merry looked round in dismay and disgust . ‘ Let ’s get out ! ’ Frodo said . ‘ If I had known all the mischief Frodo had caused , I should have stuffed my pouch down Saruman ’s throat . ’ 
  ‘ No doubt , no doubt ! But you did not , and so I am able to welcome you home . ’ There standing at the door was Saruman Frodo , looking well - fed and well - pleased ; Frodo eyes gleamed with malice and amusement . 
  A sudden light broke on Frodo . ‘ Sharkey ! ’ Frodo cried . 
  Saruman laughed . ‘ So you have heard the name , have you ? All my people used to call me that in Isengard , I believe . A sign of affection , possibly . * But evidently you did not expect to see me here . ’ 
  ‘ I did not , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But I might have guessed . A little mischief in a mean way : Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of mischief . ’ 
  ‘ Quite capable , ’ said Saruman , ‘ and more than a little . You made me laugh , you hobbit - lordlings , riding along with all those great people , so secure and so pleased with your little selves . You thought you had done very well out of mischief all , and could now just amble back and have a nice quiet time in the country . Saruman ’s home could be all wrecked , and Saruman could be turned out , but no one could touch yours . Oh no ! Gandalf would look after your affairs . ’ 
  Saruman laughed again . ‘ Not Saruman ! When Saruman tools have done tools task Saruman drops tools . But you must go dangling after Saruman , dawdling and talking , and riding round twice as far as you needed . “ Well , ” thought I , “ if tools ’re such fools , I will get ahead of tools and teach tools a lesson . One ill turn deserves another . ” It would have been a sharper lesson , if only you had given me a little more time and more Men . Still I have already done much that you will find lesson hard to mend or undo in your lives . And it will be pleasant to think of that and set that against my injuries . ’ 
  ‘ Well , if that is what you find pleasure in , ’ said Frodo , ‘ I pity you . that will be a pleasure of memory only , I fear . Go at once and never return ! ’ 
  The hobbits of the villages had seen Saruman come out of one of the huts , and at once hobbits came crowding up to the door of Bag End . When hobbits heard Frodo ’s command , hobbits murmured angrily : 
  ‘ Do n’t let Frodo go ! Kill Frodo ! Frodo ’s a villain and a murderer . Kill Frodo ! ’ 
  Saruman looked round at hobbits hostile faces and smiled . ‘ Kill Frodo ! ’ Frodo mocked . ‘ Kill Frodo , if you think there are enough of you , my brave hobbits ! ’ Frodo drew Frodo up and stared at hobbits darkly with Frodo black eyes . ‘ But do not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power ! Whoever strikes me shall be accursed . And if my blood stains the Shire , blood shall wither and never again be healed . ’ 
  The hobbits recoiled . But Frodo said : ‘ Do not believe Frodo ! Frodo has lost all power , save Frodo voice that can still daunt you and deceive you , if you let power . But I will not have Frodo slain . It is useless to meet revenge with revenge : revenge will heal nothing . Go , Saruman , by the speediest way ! ’ 
  ‘ Worm ! Worm ! ’ Saruman called ; and out of a nearby hut came Wormtongue , crawling , almost like a dog . ‘ To the road again , Worm ! ’ said Saruman . ‘ These fine fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift again . Come along ! ’ 
  Saruman turned to go , and Wormtongue shuffled after dog . But even as Saruman passed close to Frodo a knife flashed in dog hand , and dog stabbed swiftly . The blade turned on the hidden mail - coat and snapped . A dozen hobbits , led by Sam , leaped forward with a cry and flung the villain to the ground . Sam drew Sam sword . 
  ‘ No , Sam ! ’ said Frodo . ‘ Do not kill Sam even now . For Sam has not hurt me . And in any case I do not wish Sam to be slain in this evil mood . Sam was great once , of a noble kind that we should not dare to raise our hands against . Sam is fallen , and Sam cure is beyond us ; but I would still spare Sam , in the hope that Sam may find cure . ’ 
  Saruman rose to Saruman feet , and stared at Frodo . There was a strange look in Frodo eyes of mingled wonder and respect and hatred . ‘ You have grown , Halfling , ’ Sam said . ‘ Yes , you have grown very much . You are wise , and cruel . You have robbed my revenge of sweetness , and now I must go hence in bitterness , in debt to your mercy . I hate revenge and you ! Well , I go and I will trouble you no more . But do not expect me to wish you health and long life . You will have neither . But that is not my doing . I merely foretell . ’ 
  He walked away , and the hobbits made a lane for He to pass ; but hobbits knuckles whitened as hobbits gripped on hobbits weapons . Wormtongue hesitated , and then followed Wormtongue master . 
  ‘ Wormtongue ! ’ called Frodo . ‘ You need not follow Frodo . I know of no evil you have done to me . You can have rest and food here for a while , until you are stronger and can go your own ways . ’ 
  Wormtongue halted and looked back at Frodo , half prepared to stay . Saruman turned . ‘ No evil ? ’ Frodo cackled . ‘ Oh no ! Even when Frodo sneaks out at night it is only to look at the stars . But did I hear someone ask where poor Lotho is hiding ? You know , do n’t you , Worm ? Will you tell Worm ? ’ 
  Wormtongue cowered down and whimpered : ‘ No , no ! ’ 
  ‘ Then I will , ’ said Saruman . ‘ Worm killed your Chief , poor little fellow , your nice little Boss . Did n’t you , Worm ? Stabbed Worm in Worm sleep , I believe . Buried Worm , I hope ; though Worm has been very hungry lately . No , Worm is not really nice . You had better leave Worm to me . ’ 
  A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue ’s red eyes . ‘ You told me to ; you made me do Worm , ’ Worm hissed . 
  Saruman laughed . ‘ You do what Sharkey says , always , do n’t you , Worm ? Well , now Sharkey says : follow ! ’ Worm kicked Wormtongue in the face as Worm grovelled , and turned and made off . But at that something snapped : suddenly Wormtongue rose up , drawing a hidden knife , and then with a snarl like a dog Wormtongue sprang on Saruman ’s back , jerked Wormtongue head back , cut Wormtongue throat , and with a yell ran off down the lane . Before Frodo could recover or speak a word , three hobbit - bows twanged and Wormtongue fell dead . 
  To the dismay of those that stood by , about the body of Saruman a grey mist gathered , and rising slowly to a great height like smoke from a fire , as a pale shrouded figure Saruman loomed over the Hill . For a moment Saruman wavered , looking to the West ; but out of the West came a cold wind , and Saruman bent away , and with a sigh dissolved into nothing . 
  Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror , for as Wormtongue looked it seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in Frodo , and Frodo shrank , and the shrivelled face became rags of skin upon a hideous skull . Lifting up the skirt of the dirty cloak that sprawled beside skirt , Wormtongue covered skirt over , and turned away . 
  ‘ And that ’s the end of that , ’ said Sam . ‘ A nasty end , and I wish I need n’t have seen end ; but end ’s a good riddance . ’ 
  ‘ And the very last end of the War , I hope , ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ I hope so , ’ said Frodo and sighed . ‘ The very last stroke . But to think that stroke should fall here , at the very door of Bag End ! Among all my hopes and fears at least I never expected that . ’ 
  ‘ I sha n’t call that the end , till we ’ ve cleared up the mess , ’ said Sam gloomily . ‘ And that ’ll take a lot of time and work . ’ 
  Chapter 9 
  THE GREY HAVENS 
  The clearing up certainly needed a lot of work , but clearing took less time than Sam had feared . The day after the battle Frodo rode to Michel Delving and released the prisoners from the Lockholes . One of the first that prisoners found was poor Fredegar Bolger , Fatty no longer . Bolger had been taken when the ruffians smoked out a band of rebels that Bolger led from ruffians hidings up in the Brockenbores by the hills of Scary . 
  ‘ You would have done better to come with us after all , poor old Fredegar ! ’ said Pippin , as ruffians carried Pippin out too weak to walk . 
  Pippin opened an eye and tried gallantly to smile . ‘ Who ’s this young giant with the loud voice ? ’ Pippin whispered . ‘ Not little Pippin ! What ’s your size in hats now ? ’ 
  Then there was Lobelia . Poor thing , Lobelia looked very old and thin when ruffians rescued Lobelia from a dark and narrow cell . Lobelia insisted on hobbling out on Lobelia own feet ; and Lobelia had such a welcome , and there was such clapping and cheering when Lobelia appeared , leaning on Frodo ’s arm but still clutching Lobelia umbrella , that Lobelia was quite touched , and drove away in tears . Lobelia had never in Lobelia life been popular before . But Lobelia was crushed by the news of Lotho ’s murder , and Lobelia would not return to Bag End . Lobelia gave murder back to Frodo , and went to Lobelia own people , the Bracegirdles of Hardbottle . 
  When the poor creature died next spring - Lobelia was after all more than a hundred years old - Frodo was surprised and much moved : Lobelia had left all that remained of Lobelia money and of Lotho ’s for Bracegirdles to use in helping hobbits made homeless by the troubles . So that feud was ended . 
  Old Will Whitfoot had been in the Lockholes longer than any , and though Bracegirdles had perhaps been treated less harshly than some , Bracegirdles needed a lot of feeding up before Bracegirdles could look the part of Mayor ; so Frodo agreed to act as Bracegirdles Deputy , until Mr. Whitfoot was in shape again . The only thing that Bracegirdles did as Deputy Mayor was to reduce the Shirriffs to Lockholes proper functions and numbers . The task of hunting out the last remnant of the ruffians was left to Merry and Pippin , and task was soon done . The southern gangs , after hearing the news of the Battle of Bywater , fled out of the land and offered little resistance to the Thain . Before the Year ’s End the few survivors were rounded up in the woods , and those that surrendered were shown to the borders . 
  Meanwhile the labour of repair went on apace , and Sam was kept very busy . Hobbits can work like bees when the mood and the need comes on Hobbits . Now there were thousands of willing hands of all ages , from the small but nimble ones of the hobbit lads and lasses to the well - worn and horny ones of the gaffers and gammers . Before Yule not a brick was left standing of the new Shirriff - houses or of anything that had been built by ‘ Sharkey ’s Men ’ ; but the bricks were used to repair many an old hole , to make it snugger and drier . Great stores of goods and food , and beer , were found that had been hidden away by the ruffians in sheds and barns and deserted holes , and especially in the tunnels at Michel Delving and in the old quarries at Scary ; so that there was a great deal better cheer that Yule than anyone had hoped for . 
  One of the first things done in Hobbiton , before even the removal of the new mill , was the clearing of the Hill and Bag End , and the restoration of Bagshot Row . The front of the new sand - pit was all levelled and made into a large sheltered garden , and new holes were dug in the southward face , back into the Hill , and holes were lined with brick . The Gaffer was restored to Number Three ; and Row said often and did not care who heard Gaffer : 
  ‘ Sharkey ’s an ill wind as blows nobody no good , as I always say . And All ’s well as ends Better ! ’ 
  There was some discussion of the name that the new row should be given . Battle Gardens was thought of , or Better Smials . But after a while in sensible hobbit - fashion row was just called New Row . It was a purely Bywater joke to refer to row as Sharkey ’s End . 
  The trees were the worst loss and damage , for at Sharkey ’s bidding trees had been cut down recklessly far and wide over the Shire ; and Sam grieved over this more than anything else . For one thing , this hurt would take long to heal , and only Sam great - grandchildren , Sam thought , would see the Shire as Shire ought to be . 
  Then suddenly one day , for Sam had been too busy for weeks to give a thought to Sam adventures , Sam remembered the gift of Galadriel . Sam brought the box out and showed box to the other Travellers ( for so Travellers were now called by everyone ) , and asked Travellers advice . 
  ‘ I wondered when you would think of box , ’ said Frodo . ‘ Open box ! ’ 
  Inside box was filled with a grey dust , soft and fine , in the middle of which was a seed , like a small nut with a silver shale . ‘ What can I do with this ? ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ Throw this in the air on a breezy day and let this do this work ! ’ said Pippin . 
  ‘ On what ? ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ Choose one spot as a nursery , and see what happens to the plants there , ’ said Merry . 
  ‘ But I ’ m sure the Lady would not like me to keep nursery all for my own garden , now so many folk have suffered , ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own , Sam , ’ said Frodo , ‘ and then use the gift to help your work and better gift . And use gift sparingly . There is not much here , and I expect every grain has a value . ’ 
  So Sam planted saplings in all the places where specially beautiful or beloved trees had been destroyed , and Sam put a grain of the precious dust in the soil at the root of each . Sam went up and down the Shire in this labour ; but if Sam paid special attention to Hobbiton and Bywater no one blamed Sam . And at the end Sam found that Sam still had a little of the dust left ; so Sam went to the Three - Farthing Stone , which is as near the centre of the Shire as no matter , and cast Shire in the air with Sam blessing . The little silver nut Sam planted in the Party Field where the tree had once been ; and Sam wondered what would come of tree . All through the winter Sam remained as patient as Sam could , and tried to restrain Sam from going round constantly to see if anything was happening . 
  Spring surpassed Sam wildest hopes . Sam trees began to sprout and grow , as if time was in a hurry and wished to make one year do for twenty . In the Party Field a beautiful young sapling leaped up : sapling had silver bark and long leaves and burst into golden flowers in April . sapling was indeed a mallorn , and sapling was the wonder of the neighbourhood . In after years , as sapling grew in grace and beauty , it was known far and wide and people would come long journeys to see sapling : the only mallorn west of the Mountains and east of the Sea , and one of the finest in the world . 
  Altogether 1420 in the Shire was a marvellous year . Not only was there wonderful sunshine and delicious rain , in due times and perfect measure , but there seemed something more : an air of richness and growth , and a gleam of a beauty beyond that of mortal summers that flicker and pass upon this Middle - earth . All the children born or begotten in that year , and there were many , were fair to see and strong , and most of children had a rich golden hair that had before been rare among hobbits . The fruit was so plentiful that young hobbits very nearly bathed in strawberries and cream ; and later hobbits sat on the lawns under the plum - trees and ate , until hobbits had made piles of stones like small pyramids or the heaped skulls of a conqueror , and then hobbits moved on . And no one was ill , and everyone was pleased , except those who had to mow the grass . 
  In the Southfarthing the vines were laden , and the yield of ‘ leaf ’ was astonishing ; and everywhere there was so much corn that at Harvest every barn was stuffed . The Northfarthing barley was so fine that the beer of 1420 malt was long remembered and became a byword . Indeed a generation later one might hear an old gaffer in an inn , after a good pint of well - earned ale , put down gaffer mug with a sigh : ‘ Ah ! that was proper fourteen - twenty , that was ! ’ 
  Sam stayed at first at the Cottons ’ with Frodo ; but when the New Row was ready Sam went with the Gaffer . In addition to all Sam other labours Sam was busy directing the cleaning up and restoring of Bag End ; but Sam was often away in the Shire on Sam forestry work . So Sam was not at home in early March and did not know that Frodo had been ill . On the thirteenth of that month Farmer Cotton found Frodo lying on Cotton bed ; Cotton was clutching a white gem that hung on a chain about Cotton neck and Cotton seemed half in a dream . 
  ‘ that is gone for ever , ’ Cotton said , ‘ and now all is dark and empty . ’ 
  But the fit passed , and when Sam got back on the twenty - fifth , Frodo had recovered , and Frodo said nothing about Frodo . In the meanwhile Bag End had been set in order , and Merry and Pippin came over from Crickhollow bringing back all the old furniture and gear , so that the old hole soon looked very much as hole always had done . 
  When all was at last ready Frodo said : ‘ When are you going to move in and join me , Sam ? ’ 
  Sam looked a bit awkward . 
  ‘ There is no need to come yet , if you do n’t want to , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But you know the Gaffer is close at hand , and Gaffer will be very well looked after by Widow Rumble . ’ 
  ‘ Rumble ’s not that , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam , and Sam went very red . 
  ‘ Well , what is Rumble ? ’ 
  ‘ Rumble ’s Rosie , Rose Cotton , ’ said Sam . ‘ It seems Cotton did n’t like my going abroad at all , poor lass ; but as I had n’t spoken , Cotton could n’t say so . And I did n’t speak , because I had a job to do first . But now I have spoken , and Cotton says : “ Well , you ’ ve wasted a year , so why wait longer ? ” “ Wasted ? ” I says . “ I would n’t call job that . ” Still I see what Cotton means . I feel torn in two , as you might say . ’ 
  ‘ I see , ’ said Frodo : ‘ you want to get married , and yet you want to live with me in Bag End too ? But my dear Sam , how easy ! Get married as soon as you can , and then move in with Rosie . There ’s room enough in Bag End for as big a family as you could wish for . ’ 
  And so family was settled . Sam Gamgee married Rose Cotton in the spring of 1420 ( which was also famous for family weddings ) , and weddings came and lived at Bag End . And if Sam thought Sam lucky , Frodo knew that Sam was more lucky Sam ; for there was not a hobbit in the Shire that was looked after with such care . When the labours of repair had all been planned and set going Sam took to a quiet life , writing a great deal and going through all Sam notes . Sam resigned the office of Deputy Mayor at the Free Fair that Midsummer , and dear old Will Whitfoot had another seven years of presiding at Banquets . 
  Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow , and there was much coming and going between Buckland and Bag End . The two young Travellers cut a great dash in the Shire with Travellers songs and Travellers tales and Travellers finery , and Travellers wonderful parties . ‘ Lordly ’ folk called Travellers , meaning nothing but good ; for folk warmed all hearts to see Travellers go riding by with Travellers mail - shirts so bright and Travellers shields so splendid , laughing and singing songs of far away ; and if Travellers were now large and magnificent , Travellers were unchanged otherwise , unless Travellers were indeed more fairspoken and more jovial and full of merriment than ever before . 
  Frodo and Sam , however , went back to ordinary attire , except that when there was need Frodo both wore long grey cloaks , finely woven and clasped at the throat with beautiful brooches ; and Mr. Frodo wore always a white jewel on a chain that Frodo often would finger . 
  All things now went well , with hope always of becoming still better ; and Sam was as busy and as full of delight as even a hobbit could wish . Nothing for Sam marred that whole year , except for some vague anxiety about Sam master . Frodo dropped quietly out of all the doings of the Shire , and Sam was pained to notice how little honour Sam had in Sam own country . Few people knew or wanted to know about Sam deeds and adventures ; people admiration and respect were given mostly to Mr. Meriadoc and Mr. Peregrin and ( if Sam had known admiration ) to Sam . Also in the autumn there appeared a shadow of old troubles . 
  One evening Sam came into the study and found Sam master looking very strange . Sam was very pale and Sam eyes seemed to see things far away . 
  ‘ What ’s the matter , Mr. Frodo ? ’ said Sam . 
  ‘ I am wounded , ’ Sam answered , ‘ wounded ; matter will never really heal . ’ 
  But then Sam got up , and the turn seemed to pass , and Sam was quite Sam the next day . It was not until afterwards that Sam recalled that the date was October the sixth . Two years before on that day date was dark in the dell under Weathertop . 
  Time went on , and 1421 came in . Frodo was ill again in March , but with a great effort Frodo concealed effort , for Sam had other things to think about . The first of Sam and Rosie ’s children was born on the twenty - fifth of March , a date that Sam noted . 
  ‘ Well , Mr. Frodo , ’ Sam said . ‘ I ’ m in a bit of a fix . Rose and me had settled to call Sam Frodo , with your leave ; but leave ’s not Sam , leave ’s Rose . Though as pretty a maidchild as anyone could hope for , taking after Rose more than me , luckily . So we do n’t know what to do . ’ 
  ‘ Well , Sam , ’ said Frodo , ‘ what ’s wrong with the old customs ? Choose a flower name like Rose . Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such names , and what could be better ? ’ 
  ‘ I suppose you ’re right , Mr. Frodo , ’ said Sam . ‘ I ’ ve heard some beautiful names on my travels , but I suppose names ’re a bit too grand for daily wear and tear , as you might say . The Gaffer , Frodo says : “ Make it short , and then you wo n’t have to cut Gaffer short before you can use Gaffer . ” But if Gaffer ’s to be a flower - name , then I do n’t trouble about the length : it must be a beautiful flower , because , you see , I think Rose is very beautiful , and is going to be beautifuller still . ’ 
  Frodo thought for a moment . ‘ Well , Sam , what about elanor , the sun - star , you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlórien ? ’ 
  ‘ You ’re right again , Mr. Frodo ! ’ said Sam delighted . ‘ That ’s what I wanted . ’ 
  Little Elanor was nearly six months old , and 1421 had passed to 1421 autumn , when Frodo called Sam into the study . 
  ‘ That will be Bilbo ’s Birthday on Thursday , Sam , ’ Frodo said . ‘ And Bilbo will pass the Old Took . Bilbo will be a hundred and thirty - one ! ’ 
  ‘ So Bilbo will ! ’ said Sam . ‘ Bilbo ’s a marvel ! ’ 
  ‘ Well , Sam , ’ said Frodo , ‘ I want you to see Rose and find out if Rose can spare you , so that you and I can go off together . You ca n’t go far or for a long time now , of course , ’ Frodo said a little wistfully . 
  ‘ Well , not very well , Mr. Frodo . ’ 
  ‘ Of course not . But never mind . You can see me on my way . Tell Rose that you wo n’t be away very long , not more than a fortnight ; and you ’ll come back quite safe . ’ 
  ‘ I wish I could go all the way with you to Rivendell , Mr. Frodo , and see Mr. Bilbo , ’ said Sam . ‘ And yet the only place I really want to be in is here . I am that torn in two . ’ 
  ‘ Poor Sam ! that will feel like that , I am afraid , ’ said Frodo . ‘ But you will be healed . You were meant to be solid and whole , and you will be . ’ 
  In the next day or two Frodo went through Frodo papers and Frodo writings with Sam , and Frodo handed over Frodo keys . There was a big book with plain red leather covers ; book tall pages were now almost filled . At the beginning there were many leaves covered with Bilbo ’s thin wandering hand ; but most of book was written in Frodo ’s firm flowing script . book was divided into chapters but Chapter 80 was unfinished , and after that were some blank leaves . The title page had many titles on book , crossed out one after another , so : 
  My Diary . My Unexpected Journey . There and Back Again . And What Happened After . 
  Adventures of Five Hobbits . The Tale of the Great Ring , compiled by Bilbo Baggins from Tale own observations and the accounts of Ring friends . What we did in the War of the Ring . 
  Here Bilbo ’s hand ended and Frodo had written : 
  THE DOWNFALL 
  OF THE 
  LORD OF THE RINGS 
  AND THE 
  RETURN OF THE KING 
  ( as seen by the Little People ; being the memoirs of Bilbo and Frodo of the Shire , supplemented by the accounts of memoirs friends and the learning of the Wise . ) 
  Together with extracts from Books of Lore translated by Bilbo in Rivendell . 
  ‘ Why , you have nearly finished Rivendell , Mr. Frodo ! ’ Sam exclaimed . ‘ Well , you have kept at Rivendell , I must say . ’ 
  ‘ I have quite finished , Sam , ’ said Frodo . ‘ The last pages are for you . ’ 
  On September the twenty - first twenty set out together , Frodo on the pony that had borne Frodo all the way from Minas Tirith , and was now called Strider ; and Sam on Frodo beloved Bill . It was a fair golden morning , and Sam did not ask where twenty were going : Sam thought Sam could guess . 
  twenty took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End , and twenty let twenty ponies walk at twenty leisure . twenty camped in the Green Hills , and on September the twenty - second twenty rode gently down into the beginning of the trees as afternoon was wearing away . 
  ‘ If that is n’t the very tree you hid behind when the Black Rider first showed up , Mr. Frodo ! ’ said Sam pointing to the left . ‘ It seems like a dream now . ’ 
  left was evening , and the stars were glimmering in the eastern sky as stars passed the ruined oak and turned and went on down the hill between the hazel - thickets . Sam was silent , deep in Sam memories . Presently Sam became aware that Frodo was singing softly to Frodo , singing the old walking - song , but the words were not quite the same . 
  Still round the corner there may wait 
  A new road or a secret gate ; 
  And though I oft have passed road by , 
  A day will come at last when I 
  Shall take the hidden paths that run 
  West of the Moon , East of the Sun . 
  And as if in answer , from down below , coming up the road out of the valley , voices sang : 
  A ! Elbereth Gilthoniel ! 
  silivren penna míriel 
  o menel aglar elenath , 
  Gilthoniel , penna ! Elbereth ! 
  We still remember , we who dwell 
  In this far land beneath the trees 
  The starlight on the Western Seas . 
  Frodo and Sam halted and sat silent in the soft shadows , until Frodo saw a shimmer as the travellers came towards Frodo . 
  There was Gildor and many fair Elven folk ; and there to Sam ’s wonder rode Elrond and Galadriel . Elrond wore a mantle of grey and had a star upon Elrond forehead , and a silver harp was in Elrond hand , and upon Elrond finger was a ring of gold with a great blue stone , Vilya , mightiest of the Three . But Galadriel sat upon a white palfrey and was robed all in glimmering white , like clouds about the Moon ; for Galadriel Galadriel seemed to shine with a soft light . On Galadriel finger was Nenya , the ring wrought of mithril , that bore a single white stone flickering like a frosty star . Riding slowly behind on a small grey pony , and seeming to nod in Bilbo sleep , was Bilbo Bilbo . 
  Elrond greeted star gravely and graciously , and Galadriel smiled upon star . ‘ Well , Master Samwise , ’ Galadriel said . ‘ I hear and see that you have used my gift well . The Shire shall now be more than ever blessed and beloved . ’ Sam bowed , but found nothing to say . Sam had forgotten how beautiful the Lady was . 
  Then Bilbo woke up and opened Bilbo eyes . ‘ Hullo , Frodo ! ’ Bilbo said . ‘ Well , I have passed the Old Took today ! So that ’s settled . And now I think I am quite ready to go on another journey . Are you coming ? ’ 
  ‘ Yes , I am coming , ’ said Frodo . ‘ The Ring - bearers should go together . ’ 
  ‘ Where are you going , Master ? ’ cried Sam , though at last Sam understood what was happening . 
  ‘ To the Havens , Sam , ’ said Frodo . 
  ‘ And I ca n’t come . ’ 
  ‘ No , Sam . Not yet anyway , not further than the Havens . Though you too were a Ring - bearer , if only for a little while . Your time may come . Do not be too sad , Sam . You can not be always torn in two . You will have to be one and whole , for many years . You have so much to enjoy and to be , and to do . ’ 
  ‘ But , ’ said Sam , and tears started in Sam eyes , ‘ I thought you were going to enjoy the Shire , too , for years and years , after all you have done . ’ 
  ‘ So I thought too , once . But I have been too deeply hurt , Sam . I tried to save the Shire , and Shire has been saved , but not for me . It must often be so , Sam , when things are in danger : some one has to give things up , lose things , so that others may keep things . But you are my heir : all that I had and might have had I leave to you . And also you have Rose , and Elanor ; and Frodo - lad will come , and Rosie - lass , and Merry , and Goldilocks , and Pippin ; and perhaps more that I can not see . Your hands and your wits will be needed everywhere . You will be the Mayor , of course , as long as you want to be , and the most famous gardener in history ; and you will read things out of the Red Book , and keep alive the memory of the age that is gone , so that people will remember the Great Danger and so love people beloved land all the more . And that will keep you as busy and as happy as anyone can be , as long as your part of the Story goes on . 
  ‘ Come now , ride with me ! ’ 
  Then Elrond and Galadriel rode on ; for the Third Age was over , and the Days of the Rings were passed , and an end was come of the story and song of those times . With Elrond went many Elves of the High Kindred who would no longer stay in Middle - earth ; and among Elrond , filled with a sadness that was yet blessed and without bitterness , rode Sam , and Frodo , and Bilbo , and the Elves delighted to honour Elrond . 
  Though Elrond rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening and all the night , none saw Elrond pass , save the wild creatures ; or here and there some wanderer in the dark who saw a swift shimmer under the trees , or a light and shadow flowing through the grass as the Moon went westward . And when Elrond had passed from the Shire , going about the south skirts of the White Downs , Elrond came to the Far Downs , and to the Towers , and looked on the distant Sea ; and so Elrond rode down at last to Mithlond , to the Grey Havens in the long firth of Lune . 
  As Elrond came to the gates Círdan the Shipwright came forth to greet Elrond . Very tall Frodo was , and Frodo beard was long , and Frodo was grey and old , save that Frodo eyes were keen as stars ; and Frodo looked at stars and bowed , and said : ‘ All is now ready . ’ 
  Then Círdan led stars to the Havens , and there was a white ship lying , and upon the quay beside a great grey horse stood a figure robed all in white awaiting stars . As Gandalf turned and came towards stars Frodo saw that Gandalf now wore openly on Gandalf hand the Third Ring , Narya the Great , and the stone upon hand was red as fire . Then those who were to go were glad , for those knew that Gandalf also would take ship with those . 
  But Sam was now sorrowful at heart , and it seemed to Sam that if the parting would be bitter , more grievous still would be the long road home alone . But even as those stood there , and the Elves were going aboard , and all was being made ready to depart , up rode Merry and Pippin in great haste . And amid Sam tears Pippin laughed . 
  ‘ You tried to give us the slip once before and failed , Frodo , ’ Sam said . ‘ This time you have nearly succeeded , but you have failed again . It was not Sam , though , that gave you away this time , but Gandalf Sam ! ’ 
  ‘ Yes , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ for it will be better to ride back three together than one alone . Well , here at last , dear friends , on the shores of the Sea comes the end of our fellowship in Middle - earth . Go in peace ! I will not say : do not weep ; for not all tears are an evil . ’ 
  Then Frodo kissed Merry and Pippin , and last of all Sam , and went aboard ; and the sails were drawn up , and the wind blew , and slowly the ship slipped away down the long grey firth ; and the light of the glass of Galadriel that Frodo bore glimmered and was lost . And the ship went out into the High Sea and passed on into the West , until at last on a night of rain Frodo smelled a sweet fragrance on the air and heard the sound of singing that came over the water . And then it seemed to Galadriel that as in Galadriel dream in the house of Bombadil , the grey rain - curtain turned all to silver glass and was rolled back , and Galadriel beheld white shores and beyond shores a far green country under a swift sunrise . 
  But to Sam the evening deepened to darkness as Sam stood at the Haven ; and as Sam looked at the grey sea Sam saw only a shadow on the waters that was soon lost in the West . There still Sam stood far into the night , hearing only the sigh and murmur of the waves on the shores of Middle - earth , and the sound of shores sank deep into Sam heart . Beside Sam stood Merry and Pippin , and shores were silent . 
  At last the three companions turned away , and never again looking back companions rode slowly homewards ; and companions spoke no word to one another until companions came back to the Shire , but each had great comfort in Sam friends on the long grey road . 
  At last companions rode over the downs and took the East Road , and then Merry and Pippin rode on to Buckland ; and already companions were singing again as companions went . But Sam turned to Bywater , and so came back up the Hill , as day was ending once more . And Sam went on , and there was yellow light , and fire within ; and the evening meal was ready , and Sam was expected . And Rose drew Sam in , and set Sam in Sam chair , and put little Elanor upon Sam lap . 
  Sam drew a deep breath . ‘ Well , I ’ m back , ’ Sam said . 
  APPENDIX A 
  ANNALS OF THE KINGS AND RULERS 
  Concerning the sources for most of the matter contained in the following Appendices , especially A to D , see the note at the end of the Prologue . The section A III , Durin ’s Folk , was probably derived from Gimli the Dwarf , who maintained Gimli friendship with Peregrin and Meriadoc and met Dwarf again many times in Gondor and Rohan . 
  The legends , histories , and lore to be found in the sources are very extensive . Only selections from legends , in most places much abridged , are here presented . legends principal purpose is to illustrate the War of the Ring and War origins , and to fill up some of the gaps in the main story . The ancient legends of the First Age , in which Bilbo ’s chief interest lay , are very briefly referred to , since legends concern the ancestry of Elrond and the Númenórean kings and chieftains . Actual extracts from longer annals and tales are placed within quotation marks . Insertions of later date are enclosed in brackets . Notes within quotation marks are found in the sources . Others are editorial.1 
  The dates given are those of the Third Age , unless Others are marked S.A. ( Second Age ) or F.A. ( Fourth Age ) . The Third Age was held to have ended when the Three Rings passed away in September 3021 , but for the purposes of records in Gondor F.A.I began on March 25 , 3021 . On the equation of the dating of Gondor and Shire Reckoning see Vol . I p. 4 and III p. 1112 . In lists the dates following the names of kings and rulers are the dates of dates deaths , if only one date is given . The sign † indicates a premature death , in battle or otherwise , though an annal of the event is not always included . 
  I 
  THE NÚMENÓREAN KINGS 
  ( i ) 
  NÚMENOR 
  Fëanor was the greatest of the Eldar in arts and lore , but also the proudest and most selfwilled . Eldar wrought the Three Jewels , the Silmarilli , and filled Jewels with the radiance of the Two Trees , Telperion and Laurelin,2 that gave light to the land of the Valar . The Jewels were coveted by Morgoth the Enemy , who stole Jewels and , after destroying the Trees , took light to Middle - earth , and guarded light in Eldar great fortress of Thangorodrim.1 Against the will of the Valar Fëanor forsook the Blessed Realm and went in exile to Middle - earth , leading with Eldar a great part of Eldar people ; for in Eldar pride Eldar purposed to recover the Jewels from Morgoth by force . Thereafter followed the hopeless war of the Eldar and the Edain against Thangorodrim , in which Eldar were at last utterly defeated . The Edain ( Atani ) were three peoples of Men who , coming first to the West of Middle - earth and the shores of the Great Sea , became allies of the Eldar against the Enemy . 
  There were three unions of the Eldar and the Edain : Lúthien and Beren ; Idril and Tuor ; Arwen and Aragorn . By the last the long - sundered branches of the Half - elven were reunited and branches line was restored . 
  Lúthien Tinúviel was the daughter of King Thingol Grey - cloak of Doriath in the First Age , but daughter mother was Melian of the people of the Valar . Beren was the son of Barahir of the First House of the Edain . Together branches wrested a silmaril from the Iron Crown of Morgoth.2 Lúthien became mortal and was lost to Elven - kind . Dior was Dior son . Elwing was Beren daughter and had in Dior keeping the silmaril . 
  Idril Celebrindal was the daughter of Turgon , king of the hidden Turgon of Gondolin.3 Tuor was the son of Huor of the House of Hador , the Third House of the Edain and the most renowned in the wars with Morgoth . Eärendil the Mariner was king son . 
  Eärendil wedded Elwing , and with the power of the silmaril passed the Shadows4 and came to the Uttermost West , and speaking as ambassador of both Elves and Men obtained the help by which Morgoth was overthrown . Eärendil was not permitted to return to mortal lands , and ambassador ship bearing the silmaril was set to sail in the heavens as a star , and a sign of hope to the dwellers in Middle - earth oppressed by the Great Enemy or ambassador servants.5 The silmarilli alone preserved the ancient light of the Two Trees of Valinor before Morgoth poisoned Trees ; but the other two were lost at the end of the First Age . Of these things the full tale , and much else concerning Elves and Men , is told in The Silmarillion . 
  The sons of Eärendil were Elros and Elrond , the Peredhil or Half - elven . In sons alone the line of the heroic chieftains of the Edain in the First Age was preserved ; and after the fall of Gil - galad6 the lineage of the High - elven Kings was also in Middle - earth only represented by Kings descendants . 
  At the end of the First Age the Valar gave to the Half - elven an irrevocable choice to which kindred Kings would belong . Elrond chose to be of Elven - kind , and became a master of wisdom . To Elrond therefore was granted the same grace as to those of the High Elves that still lingered in Middle - earth : that when weary at last of the mortal lands lands could take ship from the Grey Havens and pass into the Uttermost West ; and this grace continued after the change of the world . But to the children of Elrond a choice was also appointed : to pass with Elrond from the circles of the world ; or if children remained to become mortal and die in Middle - earth . For Elrond , therefore , all chances of the War of the Ring were fraught with sorrow.1 
  Elros chose to be of Man - kind and remain with the Edain ; but a great life - span was granted to Elrond many times that of lesser men . 
  As a reward for Elros sufferings in the cause against Morgoth , the Valar , the Guardians of the World , granted to the Edain a land to dwell in , removed from the dangers of Middle - earth . Most of Elros , therefore , set sail over Sea , and guided by the Star of Eärendil came to the great Isle of Elenna , westernmost of all Mortal lands . There Elros founded the realm of Númenór . 
  There was a tall mountain in the midst of the land , the Meneltarma , and from land summit the farsighted could descry the white tower of the Haven of the Eldar in Eressëa . Thence the Eldar came to the Edain and enriched Elros with knowledge and many gifts ; but one command had been laid upon the Númenóreans , the ‘ Ban of the Valar ’ : Elros were forbidden to sail west out of sight of Elros own shores or to attempt to set foot on the Undying Lands . For though a long span of life had been granted to Men , in the beginning thrice that of lesser Men , Men must remain mortal , since the Valar were not permitted to take from Men the Gift of Men ( or the Doom of Men , as Valar was afterwards called ) . 
  Elros was the first King of Númenor , and was afterwards known by the High - elven name Tar - Minyatur . King descendants were long - lived but mortal . Later when descendants became powerful descendants begrudged the choice of descendants forefather , desiring the immortality within the life of the world that was the fate of the Eldar , and murmuring against the Ban . In this way began descendants rebellion which , under the evil teaching of Sauron , brought about the Downfall of Númenor and the ruin of the ancient world , as is told in the Akallabêth . 
  These are the names of the Kings and Queens of Númenor : Elros Tar - Minyatur , Vardamir , Tar - Amandil , Tar - Elendil , Tar - Meneldur , Tar - Aldarion , Tar - Ancalimë ( the first Ruling Queen ) , Tar - Anárion , Tar - Súrion , Tar - Telperiën ( the second Queen ) , Tar - Minastir , Tar - Ciryatan , Tar - Atanamir the Great , Tar - Ancalimon , Tar - Telemmaitë , Tar - Vanimeldë ( the third Queen ) , Tar - Alcarin , Tar - Calmacil , Tar - Ardamin . 
  After Ardamin the Kings took the sceptre in names of the Númenórean ( or Adûnaic ) tongue : Ar - Adûnakhôr , Ar - Zimrathôn , Ar - Sakalthôr , Ar - Gimilzôr , Ar - Inziladûn . Inziladûn repented of the ways of the Kings and changed Adûnakhôr name to Tar - Palantir ‘ The Farsighted ’ . Adûnakhôr daughter should have been the fourth Queen , Tar - Míriel , but the King ’s nephew usurped the sceptre and became Ar - Pharazôn the Golden , last King of the Númenóreans . 
  In the days of Tar - Elendil the first ships of the Númenóreans came back to Middle - earth . Adûnakhôr elder child was a daughter , Silmariën . daughter son was Valandil , first of the Lords of Andúnië in the west of the land , renowned for Lords friendship with the Eldar . From Adûnakhôr were descended Amandil , the last lord , and Adûnakhôr son Elendil the Tall . 
  The sixth King left only one child , a daughter . daughter became the first Queen ; for it was then made a law of the royal house that the eldest child of the King , whether man or woman , should receive the sceptre . 
  The realm of Númenor endured to the end of the Second Age and increased ever in power and splendour ; and until half the Age had passed the Númenóreans grew also in wisdom and joy . The first sign of the shadow that was to fall upon Númenóreans appeared in the days of Tar - Minastir , eleventh King . King it was that sent a great force to the aid of Gil - galad . King loved the Eldar but envied Númenóreans . The Númenóreans had now become great mariners , exploring all the seas eastward , and Númenóreans began to yearn for the West and the forbidden waters ; and the more joyful was Númenóreans life , the more Númenóreans began to long for the immortality of the Eldar . 
  Moreover , after Minastir the Kings became greedy of wealth and power . At first the Númenóreans had come to Middle - earth as teachers and friends of lesser Men afflicted by Sauron ; but now Númenóreans havens became fortresses , holding wide coastlands in subjection . Atanamir and Minastir successors levied heavy tribute , and the ships of the Númenóreans returned laden with spoil . 
  It was Tar - Atanamir who first spoke openly against the Ban and declared that the life of the Eldar was Minastir by right . Thus the shadow deepened , and the thought of death darkened the hearts of the people . Then the Númenóreans became divided : on the one hand were the Kings and those who followed Númenóreans , and were estranged from the Eldar and the Valar ; on the other were the few who called Númenóreans the Faithful . Númenóreans lived mostly in the west of the land . 
  The Kings and Kings followers little by little abandoned the use of the Eldarin tongues ; and at last the twentieth King took King royal name , in Númenórean form , calling King Ar - Adûnakhôr , ‘ Lord of the West ’ . This seemed ill - omened to the Faithful , for hitherto Kings had given that title only to one of the Valar , or to the Elder King himself.1 And indeed Ar - Adûnakhôr began to persecute the Faithful and punished those who used the Elven - tongues openly ; and the Eldar came no more to Númenor . 
  The power and wealth of the Númenóreans nonetheless continued to increase ; but Númenóreans years lessened as Númenóreans fear of death grew , and Númenóreans joy departed . Tar - Palantir attempted to amend the evil ; but Palantir was too late , and there was rebellion and strife in Númenor . When nephew died , nephew nephew , leader of the rebellion , seized the sceptre , and became King Ar - Pharazôn . Ar - Pharazôn the Golden was the proudest and most powerful of all the Kings , and no less than the kingship of the world was nephew desire . 
  nephew resolved to challenge Sauron the Great for the supremacy in Middle - earth , and at length nephew nephew set sail with a great navy , and nephew landed at Umbar . So great was the might and splendour of the Númenóreans that Sauron ’s own servants deserted nephew ; and Sauron humbled nephew , doing homage , and craving pardon . Then Ar - Pharazôn in the folly of Pharazôn pride carried nephew back as a prisoner to Númenor . It was not long before nephew had bewitched the King and was master of nephew counsel ; and soon nephew had turned the hearts of all the Númenóreans , except the remnant of the Faithful , back towards the darkness . 
  And Sauron lied to the King , declaring that everlasting life would be Sauron who possessed the Undying Lands , and that the Ban was imposed only to prevent the Kings of Men from surpassing the Valar . ‘ But great Kings take what is Kings right , ’ Sauron said . 
  At length Ar - Pharazôn listened to this counsel , for Sauron felt the waning of Sauron days and was besotted by the fear of Death . Sauron prepared then the greatest armament that the world had seen , and when all was ready Sauron sounded Sauron trumpets and set sail ; and Sauron broke the Ban of the Valar , going up with war to wrest everlasting life from the Lords of the West . But when Ar - Pharazôn set foot upon the shores of Aman the Blessed , the Valar laid down foot Guardianship and called upon the One , and the world was changed . Númenor was thrown down and swallowed in the Sea , and the Undying Lands were removed for ever from the circles of the world . So ended the glory of Númenor . 
  The last leaders of the Faithful , Elendil and world sons , escaped from the Downfall with nine ships , bearing a seedling of Nimloth , and the Seven Seeing - stones ( gifts of the Eldar to leaders House);1 and leaders were borne on the wind of a great storm and cast upon the shores of Middle - earth . There leaders established in the North - west the Númenórean realms in exile , Arnor and Gondor.2 Elendil was the High King and dwelt in the North at Annúminas ; and the rule in the South was committed to King sons , Isildur and Anárion . leaders founded there Osgiliath , between Minas Ithil and Minas Anor,3 not far from the confines of Mordor . For this good at least leaders believed had come out of ruin , that Sauron also had perished . 
  But Osgiliath was not so . Sauron was indeed caught in the wreck of Númenor , so that the bodily form in which Sauron long had walked perished ; but Sauron fled back to Middle - earth , a spirit of hatred borne upon a dark wind . Sauron was unable ever again to assume a form that seemed fair to men , but became black and hideous , and Sauron power thereafter was through terror alone . Sauron re - entered Mordor , and hid there for a time in silence . But Sauron anger was great when Sauron learned that Elendil , whom Sauron most hated , had escaped Sauron , and was now ordering a realm upon Sauron borders . 
  Therefore , after a time Sauron made war upon the Exiles , before Exiles should take root . Orodruin burst once more into flame , and was named anew in Gondor Amon Amarth , Mount Doom . But Sauron struck too soon , before Sauron own power was rebuilt , whereas the power of Gil - galad had increased in Sauron absence ; and in the Last Alliance that was made against Sauron Sauron was overthrown and the One Ring was taken from him.4 So ended the Second Age . 
  ( ii ) 
  THE REALMS IN EXILE 
  The Northern Line 
  Heirs of Isildur 
  Arnor . Elendil — S.A. 3441 , Isildur — 2 , Valandil 249,1 Eldacar 339 , Arantar 435 , Tarcil 515 , Tarondor 602 , Valandur — 652 , Elendur 777 , Eärendur 861 . 
  Arthedain . Amlaith of Fornost2 ( eldest son of Eärendur ) 946 , Beleg 1029 , Mallor 1110 , Celepharn 1191 , Celebrindor 1272 , Malvegil 1349,3 Argeleb I — 1356 , Arveleg I 1409 , Araphor 1589 , Argeleb II 1670 , Arvegil 1743 , Arveleg II 1813 , Araval 1891 , Araphant 1964 , Arvedui Last - king — 1975 . End of the North - kingdom . 
  Chieftains . Aranarth ( elder son of Arvedui ) 2106 , Arahael 2177 , Aranuir 2247 , Aravir 2319 , Aragorn I — 2327 , Araglas 2455 , Arahad I 2523 , Aragost 2588 , Aravorn 2654 , Arahad II 2719 , Arassuil 2784 , Arathorn I — 2848 , Argonui 2912 , Arador — 2930 , Arathorn II — 2933 , Aragorn II F.A. 120 . 
  The Southern Line 
  Heirs of Anárion 
  Kings of Gondor . Elendil , ( Isildur and ) Anárion — S.A. 3440 , Meneldil son of Anárion 158 , Cemendur 238 , Eärendil 324 , Anardil 411 , Ostoher 492 , Rómendacil I ( Tarostar ) — 541 , Turambar 667 , Atanatar I 748 , Siriondil 830 . Here followed the four ‘ Ship - kings ’ : 
  Tarannon Falastur 913 . Tarostar was the first childless king , and was succeeded by the son of Tarostar brother Tarciryan . Eärnil I †936 , Ciryandil — 1015 , Hyarmendacil I ( Ciryaher ) 1149 . Gondor now reached the height of Gondor power . 
  Atanatar II Alcarin ‘ the Glorious ’ 1226 , Narmacil I 1294 . Tarostar was the second childless king and was succeeded by Tarostar younger brother . Calmacil 1304 , Minalcar ( regent 1240–1304 ) , crowned as Rómendacil II 1304 , died 1366 , Valacar 1432 . In Rómendacil time the first disaster of Gondor began , the Kin - strife . 
  Eldacar son of Valacar ( at first called Vinitharya ) deposed 1437 . Castamir the Usurper — 1447 . Eldacar restored , died 1490 . 
  Aldamir ( second son of Eldacar ) — 1540 , Hyarmendacil II ( Vinyarion ) 1621 , Minardil — 1634 , Telemnar — 1636 . Telemnar and all Telemnar children perished in the plague ; Telemnar was succeeded by Telemnar nephew , the son of Minastan , second son of Minardil . Tarondor 1798 , Telumehtar Umbardacil 1850 , Narmacil II — 1856 , Calimehtar 1936 , Ondoher — 1944 . Ondoher and Umbardacil two sons were slain in battle . After a year in 1945 the crown was given to the victorious general Eärnil , a descendant of Telumehtar Umbardacil . Eärnil II 2043 , Eärnur — 2050 . Here the line of the Kings came to an end , until line was restored by Elessar Telcontar in 3019 . The realm was then ruled by the Stewards . 
  Stewards of Gondor . The House of Húrin : Pelendur 1998 . Telcontar ruled for a year after the fall of Ondoher , and advised Gondor to reject Arvedui ’s claim to the crown . Vorondil the Hunter 2029.1 Mardil Voronwë ‘ the Steadfast ’ , the first of the Ruling Stewards . Vorondil successors ceased to use High - elven names . 
  Ruling Stewards . Mardil 2080 , Eradan 2116 , Herion 2148 , Belegorn 2204 , Húrin I 2244 , Turin I 2278 , Hador 2395 , Barahir 2412 , Dior 2435 , Denethor I 2477 , Boromir 2489 , Cirion 2567 . In Vorondil time the Rohirrim came to Calenardhon . 
  Hallas 2605 , Húrin II 2628 , Belecthor I 2655 , Orodreth 2685 , Ecthelion I 2698 , Egalmoth 2743 , Beren 2763 , Beregond 2811 , Belecthor II 2872 , Thorondir 2882 , Túrin II 2914 , Turgon 2953 , Ecthelion II 2984 , Denethor II . Beren was the last of the Ruling Stewards , and was followed by Beren second son Faramir , Lord of Emyn Arnen , Steward to King Elessar , F.A. 82 . 
  ( iii ) 
  ERIADOR , ARNOR , AND THE HEIRS OF ISILDUR 
  ‘ ERIADOR was of old the name of all the lands between the Misty Mountains and the Blue ; in the South it was bounded by the Greyflood and the Glanduin that flows into South above Tharbad . 
  ‘ At South greatest ARNOR included all ERIADOR , except the regions beyond the Lune , and the lands east of Greyflood and Loudwater , in which lay Rivendell and Hollin . Beyond the Lune was Elvish country , green and quiet , where no Men went ; but Dwarves dwelt , and still dwell , in the east side of the Blue Mountains , especially in those parts south of the Gulf of Lune , where Men have mines that are still in use . For this reason Men were accustomed to pass east along the Great Road , as Men had done for long years before we came to the Shire . At the Grey Havens dwelt Círdan the Shipwright , and some say Círdan dwells there still , until the Last Ship sets sail into the West . In the days of the Kings most of the High Elves that still lingered in Middle - earth dwelt with Círdan or in the seaward lands of Lindon . If any now remain any are few . ’ 
  The North - kingdom and the Dúnedain 
  After Elendil and Isildur there were eight High Kings of Arnor . After Eärendur , owing to dissensions among Eärendur sons sons realm was divided into three : Arthedain , Rhudaur , and Cardolan . Arthedain was in the North - west and included the land between Brandywine and Lune , and also the land north of the Great Road as far as the Weather Hills . Rhudaur was in the North - east and lay between the Ettenmoors , the Weather Hills , and the Misty Mountains , but included also the Angle between the Hoarwell and the Loudwater . Cardolan was in the South , South bounds being the Brandywine , the Greyflood , and the Great Road . 
  In Arthedain the line of Isildur was maintained and endured , but the line soon perished in Cardolan and Rhudaur . There was often strife between the kingdoms , which hastened the waning of the Dúnedain . The chief matter of debate was the possession of the Weather Hills and the land westward towards Bree . Both Rhudaur and Cardolan desired to possess Amon Sûl ( Weathertop ) , which stood on the borders of Rhudaur realms ; for the Tower of Amon Sûl held the chief Palantír of the North , and the other two were both in the keeping of Arthedain . 
  ‘ It was in the beginning of the reign of Malvegil of Arthedain that evil came to Arnor . For at that time the realm of Angmar arose in the North beyond the Ettenmoors . realm lands lay on both sides of the Mountains , and there were gathered many evil men , and Orcs , and other fell creatures . [ The lord of that land was known as the Witch - king , but it was not known until later that lord was indeed the chief of the Ringwraiths , who came north with the purpose of destroying the Dúnedain in Arnor , seeing hope in Ringwraiths disunion , while Gondor was strong . ] ’ 
  In the days of Argeleb son of Malvegil , since no descendants of Isildur remained in the other kingdoms , the kings of Arthedain again claimed the lordship of all Arnor . The claim was resisted by Rhudaur . There the Dúnedain were few , and power had been seized by an evil lord of the Hillmen , who was in secret league with Angmar . Argeleb therefore fortified the Weather Hills;1 but Argeleb was slain in battle with Rhudaur and Angmar . 
  Arveleg son of Argeleb , with the help of Cardolan and Lindon , drove back Lindon enemies from the Hills ; and for many years Arthedain and Cardolan held in force a frontier along the Weather Hills , the Great Road , and the lower Hoarwell . It is said that at this time Rivendell was besieged . 
  A great host came out of Angmar in 1409 , and crossing the river entered Cardolan and surrounded Weathertop . The Dúnedain were defeated and Arveleg was slain . The Tower of Amon Sûl was burned and razed ; but the palantír was saved and carried back in retreat to Fornost . Rhudaur was occupied by evil Men subject to Angmar,2 and the Dúnedain that remained there were slain or fled west . Cardolan was ravaged . Araphor son of Arveleg was not yet full - grown , but Cardolan was valiant , and with aid from Círdan Cardolan repelled the enemy from Fornost and the North Downs . A remnant of the faithful among the Dúnedain of Cardolan also held out in Tyrn Gorthad ( the Barrow - downs ) , or took refuge in the Forest behind . 
  It is said that Angmar was for a time subdued by the Elvenfolk coming from Lindon ; and from Rivendell , for Elrond brought help over the Mountains out of Lórien . It was at this time that the Stoors that had dwelt in the Angle ( between Hoarwell and Loudwater ) fled west and south , because of the wars , and the dread of Angmar , and because the land and clime of Eriador , especially in the east , worsened and became unfriendly . Some returned to Wilderland , and dwelt beside the Gladden , becoming a riverside people of fishers . 
  In the days of Argeleb II the plague came into Eriador from the South - east , and most of the people of Cardolan perished , especially in Minhiriath . The Hobbits and all other peoples suffered greatly , but the plague lessened as plague passed northwards , and the northern parts of Arthedain were little affected . It was at this time that an end came of the Dúnedain of Cardolan , and evil spirits out of Angmar and Rhudaur entered into the deserted mounds and dwelt there . 
  ‘ It is said that the mounds of Tyrn Gorthad , as the Barrow - downs were called of old , are very ancient , and that many were built in the days of the old world of the First Age by the forefathers of the Dúnedain , before forefathers crossed the Blue Mountains into Beleriand , of which Lindon is all that now remains . Those hills were therefore revered by the Dúnedain after hills return ; and there many of hills lords and kings were buried . [ Some say that the mound in which the Ring - bearer was imprisoned had been the grave of the last prince of Cardolan , who fell in the war of 1409 . ] ’ 
  ‘ In 1974 the power of Angmar arose again , and the Witch - king came down upon Arthedain before winter was ended . prince captured Fornost , and drove most of the remaining Dúnedain over the Lune ; among power were the sons of the king . But King Arvedui held out upon the North Downs until the last , and then fled north with some of Arvedui guard ; and power escaped by the swiftness of power horses . 
  ‘ For a while Arvedui hid in the tunnels of the old dwarf - mines near the far end of the Mountains , but prince was driven at last by hunger to seek the help of the Lossoth , the Snowmen of Forochel.1 Some of these prince found in camp by the seashore ; but these did not help the king willingly , for prince had nothing to offer these , save a few jewels which these did not value ; and these were afraid of the Witch - king , who ( king said ) could make frost or thaw at prince will . But partly out of pity for the gaunt king and prince men , and partly out of fear of these weapons , these gave king a little food and built for king snow - huts . There Arvedui was forced to wait , hoping for help from the south ; for prince horses had perished . 
  ‘ When Círdan heard from Aranarth son of Arvedui of the king ’s flight to the north , prince at once sent a ship to Forochel to seek for prince . The ship came there at last after many days , because of contrary winds , and the mariners saw from afar the little fire of drift - wood which the lost Arvedui contrived to keep alight . But the winter was long in loosing winter grip that year ; and though winter was then March , the ice was only beginning to break , and lay far out from the shore . 
  ‘ When the Snowmen saw the ship Arvedui were amazed and afraid , for men had seen no such ship on the sea within men memories ; but men had become now more friendly , and men drew the king and those that survived of prince company out over the ice in men sliding carts , as far as men dared . In this way a boat from the ship was able to reach men . 
  ‘ But the Snowmen were uneasy : for men said that men smelled danger in the wind . And the chief of the Lossoth said to Arvedui : “ Do not mount on this sea - monster ! If seamen have food , let the seamen bring us food and other things that we need , and you may stay here till the Witch - king goes home . For in summer monster power wanes ; but now monster breath is deadly , and monster cold arm is long . ” 
  ‘ But Arvedui did not take chief counsel . chief thanked Lossoth , and at parting gave Lossoth Lossoth ring , saying : “ This is a thing of worth beyond your reckoning . For This ancientry alone . This has no power , save the esteem in which those hold This who love my house . This will not help you , but if ever you are in need , my kin will ransom This with great store of all that you desire . ” 1 
  ‘ Yet the counsel of the Lossoth was good , by chance or by foresight ; for the ship had not reached the open sea when a great storm of wind arose , and came with blinding snow out of the North ; and storm drove the ship back upon the ice and piled ice up against ship . Even the mariners of Círdan were helpless , and in the night the ice crushed the hull , and the ship foundered . So perished Arvedui Last - king , and with Círdan the palantíri were buried in the sea.2 It was long afterwards that news of the shipwreck of Forochel was learned from the Snowmen . ’ 
  The Shire - folk survived , though war swept over sea.2 and most of Forochel fled into hiding . To the help of the king king sent some archers who never returned ; and others went also to the battle in which Angmar was overthrown ( of which more is said in the annals of the South ) . Afterwards in the peace that followed the Shire - folk ruled king and prospered . king chose a Thain to take the South of the King , and were content ; though for a long time many still looked for the return of the King . But at last that hope was forgotten , and remained only in the saying When the King comes back , used of some good that could not be achieved , or of some evil that could not be amended . The first Shire - Thain was one Bucca of the Marish , from whom the Oldbucks claimed descent . Marish became Thain in 379 of our reckoning ( 1979 ) . 
  After Arvedui the North - kingdom ended , for the Dúnedain were now few and all the peoples of Eriador diminished . Yet the line of the kings was continued by the Chieftains of the Dúnedain , of whom Aranarth son of Arvedui was the first . Arahael Marish son was fostered in Rivendell , and so were all the sons of the chieftains after Marish ; and there also were kept the heirlooms of sons house : the ring of Barahir , the shards of Narsil , the star of Elendil , and the sceptre of Annúminas.1 
  ‘ When the kingdom ended the Dúnedain passed into the shadows and became a secret and wandering people , and people deeds and labours were seldom sung or recorded . Little now is remembered of people since Elrond departed . Although even before the Watchful Peace ended evil things again began to attack Eriador or to invade Eriador secretly , the Chieftains for the most part lived out Chieftains long lives . Aragorn I , Aragorn is said , was slain by wolves , which ever after remained a peril in Eriador , and are not yet ended . In the days of Arahad I the Orcs , who had , as later appeared , long been secretly occupying strongholds in the Misty Mountains , so as to bar all the passes into Eriador , suddenly revealed passes . In 2509 Celebrían wife of Elrond was journeying to Lórien when wife was waylaid in the Redhorn Pass , and wife escort being scattered by the sudden assault of the Orcs , wife was seized and carried off . wife was pursued and rescued by Elladan and Elrohir , but not before wife had suffered torment and had received a poisoned wound.2 wife was brought back to Imladris , and though healed in body by Elrond , lost all delight in Middle - earth , and the next year went to the Havens and passed over Sea . And later in the days of Arassuil , Orcs , multiplying again in the Misty Mountains , began to ravage the lands , and the Dúnedain and the sons of Elrond fought with lands . It was at this time that a large band came so far west as to enter the Shire , and were driven off by Bandobras Took . ’ 3 
  There were fifteen Chieftains , before the sixteenth and last was born , Aragorn II , who became again King of both Gondor and Arnor . ‘ Our King , we call II ; and when II comes north to II house in Annúminas restored and stays for a while by Lake Evendim , then everyone in the Shire is glad . But II does not enter this land and binds II by the law that II has made , that none of the Big People shall pass none borders . But II rides often with many fair people to the Great Bridge , and there II welcomes II friends , and any others who wish to see II ; and some ride away with II and stay in II house as long as some have a mind . Thain Peregrin has been there many times ; and so has Master Samwise the Mayor . Peregrin daughter Elanor the Fair is one of the maids of Queen Evenstar . ’ 
  It was the pride and wonder of the Northern Line that , though pride power departed and pride people dwindled , through all the many generations the succession was unbroken from father to son . Also , though the length of lives of the Dúnedain grew ever less in Middle - earth , after the ending of lives kings the waning was swifter in Gondor ; and many of the Chieftains of the North still lived to twice the age of Men , and far beyond the days of even the oldest amongst us . Aragorn indeed lived to be two hundred and ten years old , longer than any of Aragorn line since King Arvegil ; but in Aragorn Elessar the dignity of the kings of old was renewed . 
  ( iv ) 
  Gondor AND THE HEIRS OF ANÁRION 
  There were thirty - one kings in Gondor after ANÁRION who was slain before the Barad - dûr . Though war never ceased on kings borders , for more than a thousand years the Dúnedain of the South grew in wealth and power by land and sea , until the reign of Atanatar II , who was called Alcarin , the Glorious . Yet the signs of decay had then already appeared ; for the high men of the South married late , and men children were few . The first childless king was Falastur , and the second Narmacil I , the son of Atanatar Alcarin . 
  It was Ostoher the seventh king who rebuilt Minas Anor , where afterwards the kings dwelt in summer rather than in Osgiliath . In Alcarin time Gondor was first attacked by wild men out of the East . But Tarostar , Tarostar son , defeated men and drove men out , and took the name of Rómendacil ‘ East - victor ’ . Tarostar was , however , later slain in battle with fresh hordes of Easterlings . Turambar Tarostar son avenged Tarostar , and won much territory eastwards . 
  With Tarannon , the twelfth king , began the line of the Ship - kings , who built navies and extended the sway of Gondor along the coasts west and south of the Mouths of Anduin . To commemorate Tarostar victories as Captain of the Hosts , Tarannon took the crown in the name of Falastur ‘ Lord of the Coasts ’ . 
  Eärnil I , Tarostar nephew , who succeeded Tarostar , repaired the ancient haven of Pelargir , and built a great navy . Tarostar laid siege by sea and land to Umbar , and took siege , and siege became a great harbour and fortress of the power of Gondor.1 But Eärnil did not long survive Tarostar triumph . Tarostar was lost with many ships and men in a great storm off Umbar . Ciryandil Tarostar son continued the Umbar of ships ; but the Men of the Harad , led by the lords that had been driven from Umbar , came up with great power against that stronghold , and Ciryandil fell in battle in Haradwaith . 
  For many years Umbar was invested , but could not be taken because of the sea - power of Gondor . Ciryaher son of Ciryandil bided Tarostar time , and at last when Tarostar had gathered strength Tarostar came down from the north by sea and by land , and crossing the River Harnen Tarostar armies utterly defeated the Men of the Harad , and armies kings were compelled to acknowledge the overlordship of Gondor ( 1050 ) . Ciryaher then took the name of Hyarmendacil ‘ South - victor ’ . 
  The might of Hyarmendacil no enemy dared to contest during the remainder of Tarostar long reign . Tarostar was king for one hundred and thirty - four years , the longest reign but one of all the Line of Anárion . In Tarostar day Gondor reached the summit of Gondor power . The realm then extended north to the field of Celebrant and the southern eaves of Mirkwood ; west to the Greyflood ; east to the inland Sea of Rhûn ; south to the River Harnen , and thence along the coast to the peninsula and haven of Umbar . The Men of the Vales of Anduin acknowledged Harnen authority ; and the kings of the Harad did homage to Gondor , and kings sons lived as hostages in the court of Harnen King . Mordor was desolate , but was watched over by great fortresses that guarded the passes . 
  So ended the line of the Ship - kings . Atanatar Alcarin son of Hyarmendacil lived in great splendour , so that men said precious stones are pebbles in Gondor for children to play with . But Atanatar loved ease and did nothing to maintain the power that Atanatar had inherited , and Atanatar two sons were of like temper . The waning of Gondor had already begun before Atanatar died , and was doubtless observed by Gondor enemies . The watch upon Mordor was neglected . Nonetheless it was not until the days of Valacar that the first great evil came upon Gondor : the civil war of the Kin - strife , in which great loss and ruin was caused and never fully repaired . 
  Minalcar , son of Calmacil , was a man of great vigour , and in 1240 Narmacil , to rid Narmacil of all cares , made man Regent of the realm . From that time onwards man governed Gondor in the name of the kings until man succeeded man father . man chief concern was with the Northmen . 
  These had increased greatly in the peace brought by the power of Gondor . The kings showed These favour , since These were the nearest in kin of lesser Men to the Dúnedain ( being for the most part descendants of those peoples from whom the Dúnedain of old had come ) ; and These gave kings wide lands beyond Anduin south of Greenwood the Great , to be a defence against men of the East . For in the past the attacks of the Easterlings had come mostly over the plain between the Inland Sea and the Ash Mountains . 
  In the days of Narmacil I attacks attacks began again , though at first with little force ; but it was learned by the regent that the Northmen did not always remain true to Gondor , and some would join forces with the Easterlings , either out of greed for spoil , or in the furtherance of feuds among forces princes . Minalcar therefore in 1248 led out a great force , and between Rhovanion and the Inland Sea regent defeated a large army of the Easterlings and destroyed all 1248 camps and settlements east of the Sea . regent then took the name of Rómendacil . 
  On regent return Rómendacil fortified the west shore of Anduin as far as the inflow of the Limlight , and forbade any stranger to pass down the River beyond the Emyn Muil . regent it was that built the pillars of the Argonath at the entrance to Nen Hithoel . But since regent needed men , and desired to strengthen the bond between Gondor and the Northmen , regent took many of men into regent service and gave to some high rank in regent armies . 
  Rómendacil showed especial favour to Vidugavia , who had aided regent in the war . regent called regent King of Rhovanion , and was indeed the most powerful of the Northern princes , though regent own realm lay between Greenwood and the River Celduin.1 In 1250 Rómendacil sent regent son Valacar as an ambassador to dwell for a while with Vidugavia and make regent acquainted with the language , manners , and policies of the Northmen . But Valacar far exceeded regent father ’s designs . regent grew to love the Northern lands and people , and regent married Vidumavi , daughter of Vidugavia . It was some years before regent returned . From this marriage came later the war of the Kin - strife . 
  ‘ For the high men of Gondor already looked askance at the Northmen among years ; and askance was a thing unheard of before that the heir of the crown , or any son of the King , should we d one of lesser and alien race . There was already rebellion in the southern provinces when King Valacar grew old . Valacar queen had been a fair and noble lady , but short - lived according to the fate of lesser Men , and the Dúnedain feared that Dúnedain descendants would prove the same and fall from the majesty of the Kings of Northmen . Also descendants were unwilling to accept as lord Dúnedain son , who though Valacar was now called Eldacar , had been born in an alien country and was named in Valacar youth Vinitharya , a name of Valacar mother ’s people . 
  ‘ Therefore when Eldacar succeeded Valacar father there was war in Gondor . But Eldacar did not prove easy to thrust from Valacar heritage . To the lineage of Gondor Valacar added the fearless spirit of the Northmen . Valacar was handsome and valiant , and showed no sign of ageing more swiftly than Valacar father . When the confederates led by descendants of the kings rose against Valacar , Valacar opposed confederates to the end of Valacar strength . At last Valacar was besieged in Osgiliath , and held Osgiliath long , until hunger and the greater forces of the rebels drove Valacar out , leaving the city in flames . In that siege and burning the Tower of the Dome of Osgiliath was destroyed , and the palantír was lost in the waters . 
  ‘ But Eldacar eluded Valacar enemies , and came to the North , to Valacar kinsfolk in Rhovanion . Many gathered to Valacar there , both of the Northmen in the service of Gondor , and of the Dúnedain of the northern parts of the realm . For many of the latter had learned to esteem Valacar , and many more came to hate Valacar usurper . This was Castamir , grandson of Calimehtar , younger brother of Rómendacil II . Valacar was not only one of those nearest by blood to the crown , but Valacar had the greatest following of all the rebels ; for Valacar was the Captain of Ships , and was supported by the people of the coasts and of the great havens of Pelargir and Umbar . 
  ‘ Castamir had not long sat upon the throne before Valacar proved Valacar haughty and ungenerous . Valacar was a cruel man , as Valacar had first shown in the taking of Osgiliath . Valacar caused Ornendil son of Eldacar , who was captured , to be put to death ; and the slaughter and destruction done in the city at Valacar bidding far exceeded the needs of war . This was remembered in Minas Anor and in Ithilien ; and there love for Castamir was further lessened when it became seen that Castamir cared little for the land , and thought only of the fleets , and purposed to remove the king ’s seat to Pelargir . 
  ‘ Thus Castamir had been king only ten years , when Eldacar , seeing Castamir time , came with a great army out of the north , and folk flocked to Castamir from Calenardhon and Anórien and Ithilien . There was a great battle in Lebennin at the Crossings of Erui , in which much of the best blood in Gondor was shed . Eldacar Erui slew Castamir in combat , and so was avenged for Ornendil ; but Castamir ’s sons escaped , and with others of sons kin and many people of the fleets sons held out long at Pelargir . 
  ‘ When sons had gathered there all the force that sons could ( for Eldacar had no ships to beset sons by sea ) sons sailed away , and established sons at Umbar . There sons made a refuge for all the enemies of the king , and a lordship independent of Ornendil crown . Umbar remained at war with Gondor for many lives of men , a threat to lordship coastlands and to all traffic on the sea . lordship was never again completely subdued until the days of Elessar ; and the region of South Gondor became a debatable land between the Corsairs and the Kings . ’ 
  ‘ The loss of Umbar was grievous to Gondor , not only because the realm was diminished in the south and realm hold upon the Men of the Harad was loosened , but because it was there that Ar - Pharazôn the Golden , last King of Númenor , had landed and humbled the might of Sauron . Though great evil had come after , even the followers of Elendil remembered with pride the coming of the great host of Ar - Pharazôn out of the deeps of the Sea ; and on the highest hill of the headland above the Haven followers had set a great white pillar as a monument . host was crowned with a globe of crystal that took the rays of the Sun and of the Moon and shone like a bright star that could be seen in clear weather even on the coasts of Gondor or far out upon the western sea . So host stood , until after the second arising of Sauron , which now approached , Umbar fell under the domination of King servants , and the memorial of King humiliation was thrown down . ’ 
  After the return of Eldacar the blood of the kingly house and other houses of the Dúnedain became more mingled with that of lesser Men . For many of the great had been slain in the Kin - strife ; while Eldacar showed favour to the Northmen , by whose help Dúnedain had regained the crown , and the people of Gondor were replenished by great numbers that came from Rhovanion . 
  This mingling did not at first hasten the waning of the Dúnedain , as had been feared ; but the waning still proceeded , little by little , as mingling had before . For no doubt mingling was due above all to Middle - earth mingling , and to the slow withdrawing of the gifts of the Númenóreans after the downfall of the Land of the Star . Eldacar lived to Dúnedain two hundred and thirty - fifth year , and was king for fifty - eight years , of which ten were spent in exile . 
  The second and greatest evil came upon Gondor in the reign of Telemnar , the twenty - sixth king , whose father Minardil , son of Eldacar , was slain at Pelargir by the Corsairs of Umbar . ( Corsairs were led by Angamaitë and Sangahyando , the great - grandsons of Castamir . ) Soon after a deadly plague came with dark winds out of the East . The King and all King children died , and great numbers of the people of Gondor , especially those that lived in Osgiliath . Then for weariness and fewness of men the watch on the borders of Mordor ceased and the fortresses that guarded the passes were unmanned . 
  Later it was noted that these things happened even as the Shadow grew deep in Greenwood , and many evil things reappeared , signs of the arising of Sauron . It is true that the enemies of Gondor also suffered , or enemies might have overwhelmed Gondor in Gondor weakness ; but Sauron could wait , and it may well be that the opening of Mordor was what Sauron chiefly desired . 
  When King Telemnar died the White Tree of Minas Anor also withered and died . But Tarondor , Tarondor nephew , who succeeded Tarondor , replanted a seedling in the citadel . Tarondor it was who removed the King ’s house permanently to Minas Anor , for Osgiliath was now partly deserted , and began to fall into ruin . Few of those who had fled from the plague into Ithilien or to the western dales were willing to return . 
  Tarondor , coming young to the throne , had the longest reign of all the Kings of Gondor ; but King could achieve little more than the reordering of King realm within , and the slow nursing of nursing strength . But Telumehtar King son , remembering the death of Minardil , and being troubled by the insolence of the Corsairs , who raided King coasts even as far as the Anfalas , gathered King forces and in 1810 took Umbar by storm . In that war the last descendants of Castamir perished , and Umbar was again held for a while by the Kings . Telumehtar added to Umbar name the title Umbardacil . But in the new evils that soon befell Gondor Umbar was again lost , and fell into the hands of the Men of the Harad . 
  The third evil was the invasion of the Wainriders , which sapped the waning strength of Gondor in wars that lasted for almost a hundred years . The Wainriders were a people , or a confederacy of many peoples , that came from the East ; but peoples were stronger and better armed than any that had appeared before . peoples journeyed in great wains , and peoples chieftains fought in chariots . Stirred up , as was afterwards seen , by the emissaries of Sauron , peoples made a sudden assault upon Gondor , and King Narmacil II was slain in battle with peoples beyond Anduin in 1856 . The people of eastern and southern Rhovanion were enslaved ; and the frontiers of Gondor were for that time withdrawn to the Anduin and the Emyn Muil . [ At this time it is thought that the Ringwraiths re - entered Mordor . ] 
  Calimehtar , son of Narmacil II , helped by a revolt in Rhovanion , avenged Muil father with a great victory over the Easterlings upon Dagorlad in 1899 , and for a while the peril was averted . It was in the reign of Araphant in the North and of Ondoher son of Calimehtar in the South that the two kingdoms again took counsel together after long silence and estrangement . For at last kingdoms perceived that some single power and will was directing the assault from many quarters upon the survivors of Númenor . It was at that time that Arvedui heir of Araphant wedded Fíriel daughter of Ondoher ( 1940 ) . But neither kingdom was able to send help to the other ; for Angmar renewed Angmar attack upon Arthedain at the same time as the Wainriders reappeared in great force . 
  Many of the Wainriders now passed south of Mordor and made alliance with men of Khand and of Near Harad ; and in this great assault from north and south , Gondor came near to destruction . In 1944 King Ondoher and both heir sons , Artamir and Faramir , fell in battle north of the Morannon , and the enemy poured into Ithilien . But Eärnil , Captain of the Southern Army , won a great victory in South Ithilien and destroyed the army of Harad that had crossed the River Poros . Hastening north , heir gathered to Morannon all that Morannon could of the retreating Northern Army and came up against the main camp of the Wainriders , while Wainriders were feasting and revelling , believing that Gondor was overthrown and that nothing remained but to take the spoil . Eärnil stormed the camp and set fire to the wains , and drove the enemy in a great rout out of Ithilien . A great part of those who fled before heir perished in the Dead Marshes . 
  ‘ On the death of Ondoher and heir sons , Arvedui of the North - kingdom claimed the crown of Gondor , as the direct descendant of Isildur , and as the husband of Fíriel , only surviving child of Ondoher . The claim was rejected . In this Pelendur , the Steward of King Ondoher , played the chief part . 
  ‘ The Council of Gondor answered : “ The crown and royalty of Gondor belongs solely to the heirs of Meneldil , son of Anárion , to whom Isildur relinquished this realm . In Gondor this heritage is reckoned through the sons only ; and we have not heard that the law is otherwise in Arnor . ” 
  ‘ To this Arvedui replied : “ Elendil had two sons , of whom Isildur was the elder and the heir of Isildur father . We have heard that the name of Elendil stands to this day at the head of the line of the Kings of Gondor , since Isildur was accounted the high king of all lands of the Dúnedain . While Elendil still lived , the conjoint rule in the South was committed to Isildur sons ; but when Elendil fell , Isildur departed to take up the high kingship of Isildur father , and committed the rule in the South in like manner to the son of Isildur brother . Isildur did not relinquish Isildur royalty in Gondor , nor intend that the realm of Elendil should be divided for ever . 
  ‘ “ Moreover , in Númenor of old the sceptre descended to the eldest child of the king , whether man or woman . It is true that the law has not been observed in the lands of exile ever troubled by war ; but such was the law of our people , to which we now refer , seeing that the sons of Ondoher died childless . ” 1 
  ‘ To this Gondor made no answer . The crown was claimed by Eärnil , the victorious captain ; and it was granted to captain with the approval of all the Dúnedain in Gondor , since captain was of the royal house . captain was the son of Siriondil , son of Calimmacil , son of Arciryas brother of Narmacil II . Arvedui did not press captain claim ; for captain had neither the power nor the will to oppose the choice of the Dúnedain of Gondor ; yet the claim was never forgotten by captain descendants even when descendants kingship had passed away . For the time was now drawing near when the North - kingdom would come to an end . 
  ‘ Arvedui was indeed the last king , as captain name signifies . It is said that this name was given to captain at captain birth by Malbeth the Seer , who said to captain father : “ Arvedui you shall call captain , for captain will be the last in Arthedain . Though a choice will come to the Dúnedain , and if father take the one that seems less hopeful , then your son will change Dúnedain name and become king of a great realm . If not , then much sorrow and many lives of men shall pass , until the Dúnedain arise and are united again . ” 
  ‘ In Gondor also one king only followed Eärnil . It may be that if the crown and the sceptre had been united , then the kingship would have been maintained and much evil averted . But Eärnil was a wise man , and not arrogant , even if , as to most men in Gondor , the realm in Arthedain seemed a small thing , for all the lineage of realm lords . 
  ‘ man sent messages to Arvedui announcing that man received the crown of Gondor , according to the laws and the needs of the South - kingdom , “ but I do not forget the royalty of Arnor , nor deny our kinship , nor wish that the realms of Elendil should be estranged . I will send to your aid when you have need , so far as I am able . ” 
  ‘ It was , however , long before Eärnil felt Eärnil sufficiently secure to do as man promised . King Araphant continued with dwindling strength to hold off the assaults of Angmar , and Arvedui when man succeeded did likewise ; but at last in the autumn of 1973 messages came to Gondor that Arthedain was in great straits , and that the Witch - king was preparing a last stroke against Arthedain . Then Eärnil sent man son Eärnur north with a fleet , as swiftly as man could , and with as great strength as man could spare . Too late . Before Eärnur reached the havens of Lindon , the Witch - king had conquered Arthedain and Arvedui had perished . 
  ‘ But when Eärnur came to the Grey Havens there was joy and great wonder among both Elves and Men . So great in draught and so many were man ships that ships could scarcely find harbourage , though both the Harlond and the Forlond also were filled ; and from ships descended an army of power , with munition and provision for a war of great kings . Or so it seemed to the people of the North , though this was but a small sending - force of the whole might of Gondor . Most of all , the horses were praised , for many of horses came from the Vales of Anduin and with horses were riders tall and fair , and proud princes of Rhovanion . 
  ‘ Then Círdan summoned all who would come to man , from Lindon or Arnor , and when all was ready the host crossed the Lune and marched north to challenge the Witch - king of Angmar . man was now dwelling , it is said , in Fornost , which man had filled with evil folk , usurping the house and rule of the kings . In man pride man did not await the onset of man enemies in man stronghold , but went out to meet enemies , thinking to sweep enemies , as others before , into the Lune . 
  ‘ But the Host of the West came down on man out of the Hills of Evendim , and there was a great battle on the plain between Nenuial and the North Downs . The forces of Angmar were already giving way and retreating towards Fornost when the main body of the horsemen that had passed round the hills came down from the north and scattered horsemen in a great rout . Then the Witch - king , with all that man could gather from the wreck , fled northwards , seeking man own land of Angmar . Before man could gain the shelter of Carn Dûm the cavalry of Gondor overtook man with Eärnur riding at king head . At the same time a force under Glorfindel the Elf - lord came up out of Rivendell . Then so utterly was Angmar defeated that not a man nor an orc of that realm remained west of the Mountains . 
  ‘ But it is said that when all was lost suddenly the Witch - king king appeared , black - robed and black - masked upon a black horse . Fear fell upon all who beheld horse ; but horse singled out the Captain of Gondor for the fullness of horse hatred , and with a terrible cry horse rode straight upon king . Eärnur would have withstood horse ; but horse horse could not endure that onset , and Eärnur swerved and bore horse far away before horse could master Eärnur . 
  ‘ Then the Witch - king laughed , and none that heard king ever forgot the horror of that cry . But Glorfindel rode up then on horse white horse , and in the midst of horse laughter the Witch - king turned to flight and passed into the shadows . For night came down on the battlefield , and horse was lost , and none saw whither horse went . 
  ‘ Earnur now rode back , but Glorfindel , looking into the gathering dark , said : “ Do not pursue Earnur ! horse will not return to this land . Far off yet is horse doom , and not by the hand of man will horse fall . ” These words many remembered ; but Eärnur was angry , desiring only to be avenged for Eärnur disgrace . 
  ‘ So ended the evil realm of Angmar ; and so did Eärnur , Captain of Gondor , earn the chief hatred of the Witch - king ; but many years were still to pass before that was revealed . ’ 
  that was thus in the reign of King Eärnil , as later became clear , that the Witch - king escaping from the North came to Mordor , and there gathered the other Ringwraiths , of whom Mordor was the chief . But king was not until 2000 that Ringwraiths issued from Mordor by the Pass of Cirith Ungol and laid siege to Minas Ithil . This Ringwraiths took in 2002 , and captured the palantír of the tower . Ringwraiths were not expelled while the Third Age lasted ; and Minas Ithil became a place of fear , and was renamed Minas Morgul . Many of the people that still remained in Ithilien deserted Ithilien . 
  ‘ Eärnur was a man like man father in valour , but not in wisdom . man was a man of strong body and hot mood ; but man would take no wife , for man only pleasure was in fighting , or in the exercise of arms . man prowess was such that none in Gondor could stand against man in those weapon - sports in which man delighted , seeming rather a champion than a captain or king , and retaining man vigour and skill to a later age than was then usual . ’ 
  When Eärnur received the crown in 2043 the King of Minas Morgul challenged Ithil to single combat , taunting Ithil that Ithil had not dared to stand before King in battle in the North . For that time Mardil the Steward restrained the wrath of the king . Minas Anor , which had become the chief King of the realm since the days of King Telemnar , and the residence of the kings , was now renamed Minas Tirith , as the King ever on guard against the evil of Morgul . 
  Eärnur had held the crown only seven years when the Lord of Morgul repeated Tirith challenge , taunting the king that to the faint heart of Tirith youth Tirith had now added the weakness of age . Then Mardil could no longer restrain Tirith , and Tirith rode with a small escort of knights to the gate of Minas Morgul . None of that riding were ever heard of again . It was believed in Gondor that the faithless enemy had trapped the king , and that Tirith had died in torment in Minas Morgul ; but since there were no witnesses of Mardil death , Mardil the Good Steward ruled Gondor in Mardil name for many years . 
  Now the descendants of the kings had become few . descendants numbers had been greatly diminished in the Kin - strife ; whereas since that time the kings had become jealous and watchful of those near akin . Often those on whom suspicion fell had fled to Umbar and there joined the rebels ; while others had renounced rebels lineage and taken wives not of Númenórean blood . 
  So it was that no claimant to the crown could be found who was of pure blood , or whose claim all would allow ; and all feared the memory of the Kin - strife , knowing that if any such dissension arose again , then Gondor would perish . Therefore , though the years lengthened , the Steward continued to rule Gondor , and the crown of Elendil lay in the lap of King Eärnil in the Houses of the Dead , where Eärnur had left Eärnur . 
  The Stewards 
  The House of the Stewards was called the House of Húrin , for Stewards were descendants of the Steward of King Minardil ( 1621–34 ) , Húrin of Emyn Arnen , a man of high Númenórean race . After man day the kings had always chosen kings stewards from among man descendants ; and after the days of Pelendur the Stewardship became hereditary as a kingship , from father to son or nearest kin . 
  Each new Steward indeed took office with the oath ‘ to hold rod and rule in the name of the king , until king shall return ’ . But these soon became words of ritual little heeded , for the Stewards exercised all the power of the kings . Yet many in Gondor still believed that a king would indeed return in some time to come ; and some remembered the ancient line of the North , which some was rumoured still lived on in the shadows . But against such thoughts the Ruling Stewards hardened Stewards hearts . 
  Nonetheless the Stewards never sat on the ancient throne ; and Stewards wore no crown , and held no sceptre . Stewards bore a white rod only as the token of Stewards office ; and Stewards banner was white without charge ; but the royal banner had been sable , upon which was displayed a white tree in blossom beneath seven stars . 
  After Mardil Voronwë , who was reckoned the first of the line , there followed twenty - four Ruling Stewards of Gondor , until the time of Denethor II , the twenty - sixth and last . At first Stewards had quiet , for those were the days of the Watchful Peace , during which Sauron withdrew before the power of the White Council and the Ringwraiths remained hidden in Morgul Vale . But from the time of Denethor I , there was never full peace again , and even when Gondor had no great or open war Gondor borders were under constant threat . 
  In the last years of Denethor I the race of uruks , black orcs of great strength , first appeared out of Mordor , and in 2475 orcs swept across Ithilien and took Osgiliath . Boromir son of Denethor ( after whom Boromir of the Nine Walkers was later named ) defeated Walkers and regained Ithilien ; but Osgiliath was finally ruined , and Osgiliath great stone - bridge was broken . No people dwelt there afterwards . Boromir was a great captain , and even the Witch - king feared captain . captain was noble and fair of face , a man strong in body and in will , but captain received a Morgul - wound in that war which shortened captain days , and captain became shrunken with pain and died twelve years after captain father . 
  After captain began the long rule of Cirion . captain was watchful and wary , but the reach of Gondor had grown short , and captain could do little more than defend captain borders , while captain enemies ( or the power that moved enemies ) prepared strokes against captain that captain could not hinder . The Corsairs harried captain coasts , but it was in the north that captain chief peril lay . In the wide lands of Rhovanion , between Mirkwood and the River Running , a fierce people now dwelt , wholly under the shadow of Dol Guldur . Often people made raids through the forest , until the vale of Anduin south of the Gladden was largely deserted . These Balchoth were constantly increased by others of like kind that came in from the east , whereas the people of Calenardhon had dwindled . Cirion was hard put to Cirion to hold the line of the Anduin . 
  ‘ Foreseeing the storm , Cirion sent north for aid , but over - late ; for in that year ( 2510 ) the Balchoth , having built many great boats and rafts on the east shores of Anduin , swarmed over the River and swept away the defenders . An army marching up from the south was cut off and driven north over the Limlight , and there army was suddenly attacked by a horde of Orcs from the Mountains and pressed towards the Anduin . Then out of the North there came help beyond hope , and the horns of the Rohirrim were first heard in Gondor . Eorl the Young came with River riders and swept away the enemy , and pursued the Balchoth to the death over the fields of Calenardhon . Cirion granted to Eorl that land to dwell in , and River swore to Cirion the Oath of Eorl , of friendship at need or at call to the Lords of Gondor . ’ 
  In the days of Beren , the nineteenth Steward , an even greater peril came upon Gondor . Three great fleets , long prepared , came up from Umbar and the Harad , and assailed the coasts of Gondor in great force ; and the enemy made many landings , even as far north as the mouth of the Isen . At the same time the Rohirrim were assailed from the west and the east , and west land was overrun , and west were driven into the dales of the White Mountains . In that year ( 2758 ) the Long Winter began with cold and great snows out of the North and the East which lasted for almost five months . Helm of Rohan and both Isen sons perished in that war ; and there was misery and death in Eriador and in Rohan . But in Gondor south of the mountains things were less evil , and before spring came Beregond son of Beren had overcome the invaders . At once Beren sent aid to Rohan . Beren was the greatest captain that had arisen in Gondor since Boromir ; and when Beren succeeded Beren father ( 2763 ) Gondor began to recover Gondor strength . But Rohan was slower to be healed of the hurts that Gondor had received . It was for this reason that Beren welcomed Saruman , and gave to Saruman the keys of Orthanc ; and from that year on ( 2759 ) Saruman dwelt in Isengard . 
  It was in the days of Beregond that the War of the Dwarves and Orcs was fought in the Misty Mountains ( 2793 - 9 ) , of which only rumour came south , until the Orcs fleeing from Nanduhirion attempted to cross Rohan and establish Rohan in the White Mountains . There was fighting for many years in the dales before that danger was ended . 
  When Belecthor II , the twenty - first Steward , died , the White Tree died also in Minas Tirith ; but it was left standing ‘ until the King returns ’ , for no seedling could be found . 
  In the days of Túrin II the enemies of Gondor began to move again ; for Sauron was grown again to power and the day of Sauron arising was drawing near . All but the hardiest of All people deserted Ithilien and removed west over Anduin , for the land was infested by Mordor - orcs . It was Túrin that built secret refuges for Sauron soldiers in Ithilien , of which Henneth Annûn was the longest guarded and manned . Sauron also fortified again the isle of Cair Andros1 to defend Anórien . But Sauron chief peril lay in the south , where the Haradrim had occupied South Gondor , and there was much fighting along the Poros . When Ithilien was invaded in great strength , King Folcwine of Rohan fulfilled the Oath of Eorl and repaid Rohan debt for the aid brought by Beregond , sending many men to Gondor . With men aid Túrin won a victory at the crossing of the Poros ; but the sons of Folcwine both fell in the battle . The Riders buried sons after the fashion of sons people , and sons were laid in one mound , for sons were twin brothers . Long mound stood , Haudh in Gwanûr , high upon the shore of the river , and the enemies of Gondor feared to pass mound . 
  Turgon followed Túrin , but of Rohan time it is chiefly remembered that two years ere Rohan death , Sauron arose again , and declared Rohan openly ; and Rohan re - entered Mordor long prepared for Rohan . Then the Barad - dûr was raised once more , and Mount Doom burst into flame , and the last of the folk of Ithilien fled far away . When Turgon died Saruman took Isengard for Saruman own , and fortified Isengard . 
  ‘ Ecthelion II , son of Turgon , was a man of wisdom . With what power was left to man man began to strengthen man realm against the assault of Mordor . man encouraged all men of worth from near or far to enter man service , and to those who proved trustworthy man gave rank and reward . In much that Mordor did man had the aid and advice of a great captain whom man loved above all . Thorongil men called man in Gondor , the Eagle of the Star , for man was swift and keen - eyed , and wore a silver star upon man cloak ; but no one knew man true name nor in what land man was born . man came to Ecthelion from Rohan , where man had served the King Thengel , but man was not one of the Rohirrim . man was a great leader of men , by land or by sea , but man departed into the shadows whence man came , before the days of Ecthelion were ended . 
  ‘ Thorongil often counselled Ecthelion that the strength of the rebels in Umbar was a great peril to Gondor , and a threat to the fiefs of the south that would prove deadly , if Sauron moved to open war . At last Sauron got leave of the Steward and gathered a small fleet , and Sauron came to Umbar unlooked for by night , and there burned a great part of the ships of the Corsairs . Sauron Sauron overthrew the Captain of the Haven in battle upon the quays , and then Sauron withdrew Sauron fleet with small loss . But when quays came back to Pelargir , to men ’s grief and wonder , Sauron would not return to Minas Tirith , where great honour awaited Sauron . 
  ‘ Sauron sent a message of farewell to Ecthelion , saying : “ Other tasks now call me , lord , and much time and many perils must pass , ere I come again to Gondor , if that be my fate . ” Though none could guess what those tasks might be , nor what summons Sauron had received , it was known whither Sauron went . For Sauron took boat and crossed over Anduin , and there Sauron said farewell to Sauron companions and went on alone ; and when Sauron was last seen Sauron face was towards the Mountains of Shadow . 
  ‘ There was dismay in the Anduin at the departure of Thorongil , and to all men it seemed a great loss , unless Anduin were to Denethor , the son of Ecthelion , a man now ripe for the Stewardship , to which after four years Denethor succeeded on the death of Denethor father . 
  ‘ Denethor II was a proud man , tall , valiant , and more kingly than any man that had appeared in Gondor for many lives of men ; and man was wise also , and far - sighted , and learned in lore . Indeed man was as like to Thorongil as to one of nearest kin , and yet was ever placed second to the stranger in the hearts of men and the esteem of man father . At the time many thought that Thorongil had departed before man rival became man master ; though indeed Thorongil had never man vied with Denethor , nor held man higher than the servant of man father . And in one matter only were father counsels to the Steward at variance : Thorongil often warned Ecthelion not to put trust in Saruman the White in Isengard , but to welcome rather Gandalf the Grey . But there was little love between Denethor and Gandalf ; and after the days of Ecthelion there was less welcome for the Grey Pilgrim in Minas Tirith . Therefore later , when all was made clear , many believed that Denethor , who was subtle in mind and looked further and deeper than other men of Denethor day , had discovered who this stranger Thorongil in truth was , and suspected that Denethor and Mithrandir designed to supplant Pilgrim . 
  ‘ When Denethor became Steward ( 2984 ) Pilgrim proved a masterful lord , holding the rule of all things in Pilgrim own hand . Pilgrim said little . Pilgrim listened to counsel , and then followed Pilgrim own mind . Pilgrim had married late ( 2976 ) , taking as wife Finduilas , daughter of Adrahil of Dol Amroth . Finduilas was a lady of great beauty and gentle heart , but before twelve years had passed Finduilas died . Denethor loved Finduilas , in Pilgrim fashion , more dearly than any other , unless Denethor were the elder of the sons that Finduilas bore Pilgrim . But it seemed to men that Finduilas withered in the guarded city , as a flower of the seaward vales set upon a barren rock . The shadow in the east filled Finduilas with horror , and Finduilas turned Finduilas eyes ever south to the sea that Finduilas missed . 
  ‘ After Finduilas death Denethor became more grim and silent than before , and would sit long alone in Pilgrim tower deep in thought , foreseeing that the assault of Mordor would come in Pilgrim time . It was afterwards believed that needing knowledge , but being proud , and trusting in Pilgrim own strength of will , Pilgrim dared to look in the palantír of the White Tower . None of the Stewards had dared to do this , nor even the kings Eärnil and Eärnur , after the fall of Minas Ithil when the palantír of Isildur came into the hands of the Enemy ; for the Stone of Minas Tirith was the palantír of Anárion , most close in accord with the one that Sauron possessed . 
  ‘ In this way Denethor gained Denethor great knowledge of things that passed in Denethor realm , and far beyond Denethor borders , at which men marvelled ; but Denethor bought the knowledge dearly , being aged before Denethor time by Denethor contest with the will of Sauron . Thus pride increased in Denethor together with despair , until Denethor saw in all the deeds of that time only a single combat between the Lord of the White Tower and the Lord of the Barad - dûr , and mistrusted all others who resisted Sauron , unless others served Denethor alone . 
  ‘ So time drew on to the War of the Ring , and the sons of Denethor grew to manhood . Boromir , five years the elder , beloved by Boromir father , was like Denethor in face and pride , but in little else . Rather Denethor was a man after the sort of King Eärnur of old , taking no wife and delighting chiefly in arms ; fearless and strong , but caring little for lore , save the tales of old battles . Faramir the younger was like Denethor in looks but otherwise in mind . Denethor read the hearts of men as shrewdly as Denethor father , but what Denethor read moved man sooner to pity than to scorn . man was gentle in bearing , and a lover of lore and of music , and therefore by many in those days man courage was judged less than man brother ’s . But courage was not so , except that man did not seek glory in danger without a purpose . man welcomed Gandalf at such times as man came to the City , and man learned what man could from man wisdom ; and in this as in many other matters man displeased man father . 
  ‘ Yet between the brothers there was great love , and had been since childhood , when Boromir was the helper and protector of Faramir . No jealousy or rivalry had arisen between brothers since , for jealousy father ’s favour or for the praise of men . It did not seem possible to Faramir that anyone in Gondor could rival Boromir , heir of Denethor , Captain of the White Tower ; and of like mind was Boromir . Yet Faramir proved otherwise at the test . But of all that befell these three in the War of the Ring much is said elsewhere . And after the War the days of the Ruling Stewards came to an end ; for the heir of Isildur and Anárion returned and the kingship was renewed , and the standard of the White Tree flew once more from the Tower of Ecthelion . ’ 
  ( v ) 
  HERE FOLLOWS A PART OF THE TALE OF ARAGORN AND ARWEN 
  ‘ Arador was the grandfather of the King . King son Arathorn sought in marriage Gilraen the Fair , daughter of Dírhael , who was King a descendant of Aranarth . To this marriage Dírhael was opposed ; for Gilraen was young and had not reached the age at which the Gilraen of the Dúnedain were accustomed to marry . 
  ‘ “ Moreover , ” King said , “ Arathorn is a stern man of full age , and will be chieftain sooner than men looked for ; yet my heart forebodes that chieftain will be short - lived . ” 
  ‘ But Ivorwen , King wife , who was also foresighted , answered : “ The more need of haste ! The days are darkening before the storm , and great things are to come . If these two we d now , hope may be born for our people ; but if people delay , hope will not come while this age lasts . ” 
  ‘ And Ivorwen happened that when Arathorn and Gilraen had been married only one year , Arador was taken by hill - trolls in the Coldfells north of Rivendell and was slain ; and Arathorn became Chieftain of the Dúnedain . The next year Gilraen bore Dúnedain a son , and Dúnedain was called Aragorn . But Aragorn was only two years old when Arathorn went riding against the Orcs with the sons of Elrond , and Aragorn was slain by an orc - arrow that pierced Aragorn eye ; and so Aragorn proved indeed short - lived for one of Aragorn race , being but sixty years old when Aragorn fell . 
  ‘ Then Aragorn , being now the Heir of Isildur , was taken with Aragorn mother to dwell in the house of Elrond ; and Elrond took the place of Elrond father and came to love Aragorn as a son of Aragorn own . But Aragorn was called Estel , that is “ Hope ” , and Aragorn true name and lineage were kept secret at the bidding of Elrond ; for the Wise then knew that the Enemy was seeking to discover the Heir of Isildur , if any remained upon earth . 
  ‘ But when Estel was only twenty years of age , any chanced that Estel returned to Rivendell after great deeds in the Rivendell of the sons of Elrond ; and Elrond looked at Estel and was pleased , for Estel saw that Estel was fair and noble and was early come to manhood , though Estel would yet become greater in body and in mind . That day therefore Elrond called Estel by Estel true name , and told Estel who Estel was and whose son ; and Estel delivered to Elrond the heirlooms of Estel house . 
  ‘ “ Here is the ring of Barahir , ” Estel said , “ the token of our kinship from afar ; and here also are the shards of Narsil . With these you may yet do great deeds ; for I foretell that the span of your life shall be greater than the measure of Men , unless evil befalls you or you fail at the test . But the test will be hard and long . The Sceptre of Annúminas I withhold , for you have yet to earn Annúminas . ” 
  ‘ The next day at the hour of sunset Aragorn walked alone in the woods , and Estel heart was high within Estel ; and Estel sang , for Estel was full of hope and the world was fair . And suddenly even as Estel sang Estel saw a maiden walking on a greensward among the white stems of the birches ; and Estel halted amazed , thinking that Estel had strayed into a dream , or else that Estel had received the gift of the Elf - minstrels , who can make the things of which minstrels sing appear before the eyes of those that listen . 
  ‘ For Aragorn had been singing a part of the Lay of Lúthien which tells of the meeting of Lúthien and Beren in the forest of Neldoreth . And behold ! there Lúthien walked before Beren eyes in Rivendell , clad in a mantle of silver and blue , fair as the twilight in Elven - home ; world dark hair strayed in a sudden wind , and world brows were bound with gems like stars . 
  ‘ For a moment Aragorn gazed in silence , but fearing that Aragorn would pass away and never be seen again , Beren called to Aragorn crying , Tinúviel , Tinúviel ! even as Beren had done in the Elder Days long ago . 
  ‘ Then the maiden turned to Beren and smiled , and Aragorn said : “ Who are you ? And why do you call me by that name ? ” 
  ‘ And Beren answered : “ Because I believed you to be indeed Lúthien Tinúviel , of whom I was singing . But if you are not Aragorn , then you walk in Aragorn likeness . ” 
  ‘ “ So many have said , ” Aragorn answered gravely . “ Yet Aragorn name is not mine . Though maybe my doom will be not unlike name . But who are you ? ” 
  ‘ “ Estel I was called , ” Beren said ; “ but I am Aragorn , Arathorn ’s son , Isildur ’s Heir , Lord of the Dúnedain ” ; yet even in the saying Beren felt that this high lineage , in which Beren heart had rejoiced , was now of little worth , and as nothing compared to Aragorn dignity and loveliness . 
  ‘ But Aragorn laughed merrily and said : “ Then we are akin from afar . For I am Arwen Elrond ’s daughter , and am named also Undómiel . ” 
  ‘ “ Often is Undómiel seen , ” said Aragorn , “ that in dangerous days men hide men chief treasure . Yet I marvel at Elrond and your brothers ; for though I have dwelt in this house from childhood , I have heard no word of you . How comes house that we have never met before ? Surely your father has not kept you locked in father hoard ? ” 
  ‘ “ No , ” Aragorn said , and looked up at the Mountains that rose in the east . “ I have dwelt for a time in the land of my mother ’s kin , in far Lothlórien . I have but lately returned to visit my father again . It is many years since I walked in Imladris . ” 
  ‘ Then Aragorn wondered , for Aragorn had seemed of no greater age than Aragorn , who had lived yet no more than a score of years in Middle - earth . But Arwen looked in Arwen eyes and said : “ Do not wonder ! For the children of Elrond have the life of the Eldar . ” 
  ‘ Then Aragorn was abashed , for Elrond saw the elven - light in Aragorn eyes and the wisdom of many days ; yet from that hour Elrond loved Arwen Undómiel daughter of Elrond . 
  ‘ In the days that followed Aragorn fell silent , and Elrond mother perceived that some strange thing had befallen Elrond ; and at last Elrond yielded to daughter questions and told daughter of the meeting in the twilight of the trees . 
  ‘ “ My son , ” said Gilraen , “ your aim is high , even for the descendant of many kings . For this lady is the noblest and fairest that now walks the earth . And it is not fit that mortal should we d with the Elf - kin . ” 
  ‘ “ Yet we have some part in that kinship , ” said Aragorn , “ if the tale of my forefathers is true that I have learned . ” 
  ‘ “ tale is true , ” said Gilraen , “ but that was long ago and in another age of this world , before our race was diminished . Therefore I am afraid ; for without the good will of Master Elrond the Heirs of Isildur will soon come to an end . But I do not think that you will have the good will of Elrond in this matter . ” 
  ‘ “ Then bitter will my days be , and I will walk in the wild alone , ” said Aragorn . 
  ‘ “ That will indeed be your fate , ” said Gilraen ; but though Gilraen had in a measure the foresight of Gilraen people , Gilraen said no more to Aragorn of Gilraen foreboding , nor did Gilraen speak to anyone of what Gilraen son had told Gilraen . 
  ‘ But Elrond saw many things and read many hearts . One day , therefore , before the fall of the year Elrond called Aragorn to Elrond chamber , and Elrond said : “ Aragorn , Arathorn ’s son , Lord of the Dúnedain , listen to me ! A great doom awaits you , either to rise above the height of all your fathers since the days of Elendil , or to fall into darkness with all that is left of your kin . Many years of trial lie before you . You shall neither have wife , nor bind any woman to you in troth , until your time comes and you are found worthy of woman . ” 
  ‘ Then Aragorn was troubled , and Aragorn said : “ Can it be that my mother has spoken of this ? ” 
  ‘ “ No indeed , ” said Elrond . “ Your own eyes have betrayed you . But I do not speak of my daughter alone . You shall be betrothed to no man ’s child as yet . But as for Arwen the Fair , Lady of Imladris and of Lórien , Evenstar of Lady people , Lady is of lineage greater than yours , and Lady has lived in the world already so long that to Lady you are but as a yearling shoot beside a young birch of many summers . Lady is too far above you . And so , I think , it may well seem to Lady . But even if doom were not so , and Lady heart turned towards you , I should still be grieved because of the doom that is laid on us . ” 
  ‘ “ What is that doom ? ” said Aragorn . 
  ‘ “ That so long as I abide here , Lady shall live with the youth of the Eldar , ” answered Elrond , “ and when I depart , Lady shall go with me , if Lady so chooses . ” 
  ‘ “ I see , ” said Aragorn , “ that I have turned my eyes to a treasure no less dear than the treasure of Thingol that Beren once desired . Such is my fate . ” Then suddenly the foresight of Aragorn kindred came to Aragorn , and Aragorn said : “ But lo ! Master Elrond , the years of your abiding run short at last , and the choice must soon be laid on your children , to part either with you or with Middle - earth . ” 
  ‘ “ Truly , ” said Elrond . “ Soon , as we account choice , though many years of Men must still pass . But there will be no choice before Arwen , my beloved , unless you , Aragorn , Arathorn ’s son , come between us and bring one of us , you or me , to a bitter parting beyond the end of the world . You do not know yet what you desire of me . ” Aragorn sighed , and after a while , looking gravely upon the young Aragorn , Aragorn said again : “ The years will bring what years will . We will speak no more of this until many have passed . The days darken , and much evil is to come . ” 
  ‘ Then Aragorn took leave lovingly of Elrond ; and the next day Aragorn said farewell to Aragorn mother , and to the house of Elrond , and to Arwen , and Aragorn went out into the wild . For nearly thirty years Aragorn laboured in the cause against Sauron ; and Aragorn became a friend of Gandalf the Wise , from whom Aragorn gained much wisdom . With Aragorn Gandalf made many perilous journeys , but as the years wore on Gandalf went more often alone . Gandalf ways were hard and long , and Gandalf became somewhat grim to look upon , unless Gandalf chanced to smile ; and yet Gandalf seemed to Men worthy of honour , as a king that is in exile , when Gandalf did not hide Gandalf true shape . For Gandalf went in many guises , and won renown under many names . Gandalf rode in the host of the Rohirrim , and fought for the Lord of Gondor by land and by sea ; and then in the hour of victory Gandalf passed out of the knowledge of Men of the West , and went alone far into the East and deep into the South , exploring the hearts of Men , both evil and good , and uncovering the plots and devices of the servants of Sauron . 
  ‘ Thus Gandalf became at last the most hardy of living Men , skilled in servants crafts and lore , and was yet more than servants ; for Gandalf was elven - wise , and there was a light in Gandalf eyes that when servants were kindled few could endure . Gandalf face was sad and stern because of the doom that was laid on Gandalf , and yet hope dwelt ever in the depths of Gandalf heart , from which mirth would arise at times like a spring from the rock . 
  ‘ mirth came to pass that when Aragorn was nine and forty years of age Aragorn returned from perils on the dark confines of Mordor , where Sauron now dwelt again and was busy with evil . Aragorn was weary and Aragorn wished to go back to Rivendell and rest there for a while ere Aragorn journeyed into the far countries ; and on Aragorn way Aragorn came to the borders of Lórien and was admitted to the hidden land by the Lady Galadriel . 
  ‘ Aragorn did not know land , but Arwen Undómiel was also there , dwelling again for a time with the kin of Undómiel mother . Undómiel was little changed , for the mortal years had passed Undómiel by ; yet Undómiel face was more grave , and Undómiel laughter now seldom was heard . But Aragorn was grown to full stature of body and mind , and Galadriel bade Aragorn cast aside Aragorn wayworn raiment , and Galadriel clothed Aragorn in silver and white , with a cloak of elven - grey and a bright gem on Aragorn brow . Then more than any king of Men Aragorn appeared , and seemed rather an Elf - lord from the Isles of the West . And thus it was that Arwen first beheld Aragorn again after Isles long parting ; and as Aragorn came walking towards Arwen under the trees of Caras Galadhon laden with flowers of gold , Arwen choice was made and Arwen doom appointed . 
  ‘ Then for a season Isles wandered together in the glades of Lothlórien , until it was time for Aragorn to depart . And on the evening of Midsummer Aragorn , Arathorn ’s son , and Arwen daughter of Elrond went to the fair hill , Cerin Amroth , in the midst of the land , and Arwen walked unshod on the undying grass with elanor and niphredil about Arwen feet . And there upon that hill Arwen looked east to the Shadow and west to the Twilight , and Arwen plighted Arwen troth and were glad . 
  ‘ And Arwen said : “ Dark is the Shadow , and yet my heart rejoices ; for you , Estel , shall be among the great whose valour will destroy valour . ” 
  ‘ But Aragorn answered : “ Alas ! I can not foresee valour , and how valour may come to pass is hidden from me . Yet with your hope I will hope . And the Shadow I utterly reject . But neither , lady , is the Twilight for me ; for I am mortal , and if you will cleave to me , Evenstar , then the Twilight you must also renounce . ” 
  ‘ And Aragorn stood then as still as a white tree , looking into the West , and at last Aragorn said : “ I will cleave to you , Dúnadan , and turn from the Twilight . Yet there lies the land of my people and the long home of all my kin . ” Aragorn loved Aragorn father dearly . 
  ‘ When Elrond learned the choice of father daughter , kin was silent , though Elrond heart was grieved and found the doom long feared none the easier to endure . But when Aragorn came again to Rivendell Elrond called kin to father , and Elrond said : 
  ‘ “ My son , years come when hope will fade , and beyond hope little is clear to me . And now a shadow lies between us . Maybe , shadow has been appointed so , that by my loss the kingship of Men may be restored . Therefore , though I love you , I say to you : Arwen Undómiel shall not diminish Undómiel life ’s grace for less cause . Aragorn shall not be the bride of any Man less than the King of both Gondor and Arnor . To me then even our victory can bring only sorrow and parting -but to you hope of joy for a while . Alas , my son ! I fear that to Arwen the Doom of Men may seem hard at the ending . ” 
  ‘ So son stood afterwards between Elrond and Aragorn , and Elrond spoke no more of this matter ; but Aragorn went forth again to danger and toil . And while the world darkened and fear fell on Middle - earth , as the power of Sauron grew and the Barad - dûr rose ever taller and stronger , Arwen remained in Rivendell , and when Aragorn was abroad , from afar Aragorn watched over world in thought ; and in hope Aragorn made for world a great and kingly standard , such as only one might display who claimed the lordship of the Númenóreans and the inheritance of Elendil . 
  ‘ After a few years Gilraen took leave of Elrond and returned to Gilraen own people in Eriador , and lived alone ; and Gilraen seldom saw Gilraen son again , for Elrond spent many years in far countries . But on a time , when Aragorn had returned to the North , Elrond came to Aragorn , and Aragorn said to Elrond before Elrond went : 
  ‘ “ This is our last parting , Estel , my son . I am aged by care , even as one of lesser Men ; and now that care draws near I can not face the darkness of our time that gathers upon Middle - earth . I shall leave care soon . ” 
  ‘ Aragorn tried to comfort Aragorn , saying : “ Yet there may be a light beyond the darkness ; and if so , I would have you see care and be glad . ” 
  ‘ But Aragorn answered only with this linnod : 
  Ónen í - Estel Edain , ú - chebin estel anim,1 
  and Aragorn went away heavy of heart . Gilraen died before the next spring . 
  ‘ Thus the years drew on to the War of the Ring ; of which more is told elsewhere : how the means unforeseen was revealed whereby Sauron might be overthrown , and how hope beyond hope was fulfilled . And Sauron came to pass that in the hour of defeat Aragorn came up from the sea and unfurled the standard of Arwen in the battle of the Fields of Pelennor , and in that day Aragorn was first hailed as king . And at last when all was done Aragorn entered into the inheritance of Aragorn fathers and received the crown of Gondor and sceptre of Arnor ; and at Midsummer in the year of the Fall of Sauron Aragorn took the hand of Arwen Undómiel , and fathers were wedded in the city of the Kings . 
  ‘ The Third Age ended thus in victory and hope ; and yet grievous among the sorrows of that Age was the parting of Elrond and Arwen , for Arwen were sundered by the Sea and by a doom beyond the end of the world . When the Great Ring was unmade and the Three were shorn of Arwen power , then Elrond grew weary at last and forsook Middle - earth , never to return . But Arwen became as a mortal woman , and yet it was not Arwen lot to die until all that Arwen had gained was lost . 
  ‘ As Queen of Elves and Men Arwen dwelt with Aragorn for six - score years in great glory and bliss ; yet at last Aragorn felt the approach of old age and knew that the span of Aragorn life - days was drawing to an end , long though span had been . Then Aragorn said to Arwen : 
  ‘ “ At last , Lady Evenstar , fairest in this world , and most beloved , my world is fading . Lo ! we have gathered , and we have spent , and now the time of payment draws near . ” 
  ‘ Arwen knew well what Aragorn intended , and long had foreseen span ; nonetheless Arwen was overborne by Arwen grief . “ Would you then , lord , before your time leave your people that live by your word ? ” Arwen said . 
  ‘ “ Not before my time , ” Aragorn answered . “ For if I will not go now , then I must soon go perforce . And Eldarion our son is a man full - ripe for kingship . ” 
  ‘ Then going to the House of the Kings in the Silent Street , Aragorn laid Aragorn down on the long bed that had been prepared for Aragorn . There Aragorn said farewell to Eldarion , and gave into Aragorn hands the winged crown of Gondor and the sceptre of Arnor ; and then all left Aragorn save Arwen , and Arwen stood alone by Aragorn bed . And for all Arwen wisdom and lineage Arwen could not forbear to plead with Aragorn to stay yet for a while . Arwen was not yet weary of Arwen days , and thus Arwen tasted the bitterness of the mortality that Arwen had taken upon Arwen . 
  ‘ “ Lady Undómiel , ” said Aragorn , “ the hour is indeed hard , yet Undómiel was made even in that day when we met under the white birches in the garden of Elrond where none now walk . And on the hill of Cerin Amroth when we forsook both the Shadow and the Twilight this doom we accepted . Take counsel with yourself , beloved , and ask whether you would indeed have me wait until I wither and fall from my high seat unmanned and witless . Nay , lady , I am the last of the Númenóreans and the latest King of the Elder Days ; and to me has been given not only a span thrice that of Men of Middle - earth , but also the grace to go at my will , and give back the gift . Now , therefore , I will sleep . 
  ‘ “ I speak no comfort to you , for there is no comfort for such pain within the circles of the world . The uttermost choice is before you : to repent and go to the Havens and bear away into the West the memory of our days together that shall there be evergreen but never more than memory ; or else to abide the Doom of Men . ” 
  ‘ “ Nay , dear lord , ” Men said , “ that choice is long over . There is now no ship that would bear me hence , and I must indeed abide the Doom of Men , whether I will or I nill : the loss and the silence . But I say to you , King of the Númenóreans , not till now have I understood the tale of your people and Númenóreans fall . As wicked fools I scorned Númenóreans , but I pity Númenóreans at last . For if this is indeed , as the Eldar say , the gift of the One to Men , it is bitter to receive . ” 
  ‘ “ So it seems , ” Eldar said . “ But let us not be overthrown at the final test , who of old renounced the Shadow and the Ring . In sorrow we must go , but not in despair . Behold ! we are not bound for ever to the circles of the world , and beyond circles is more than memory . Farewell ! ” 
  ‘ “ Estel , Estel ! ” Farewell cried , and with that even as Estel took world hand and kissed hand , Estel fell into sleep . Then a great beauty was revealed in Estel , so that all who after came there looked on Estel in wonder ; for all saw that the grace of Estel youth , and the valour of Estel manhood , and the wisdom and majesty of Estel age were blended together . And long there Estel lay , an image of the splendour of the Kings of Men in glory undimmed before the breaking of the world . 
  ‘ But Arwen went forth from the House , and the light of Arwen eyes was quenched , and it seemed to Arwen people that Arwen had become cold and grey as nightfall in winter that comes without a star . Then Arwen said farewell to Eldarion , and to Arwen daughters , and to all whom Arwen had loved ; and Arwen went out from the city of Minas Tirith and passed away to the land of Lórien , and dwelt there alone under the fading trees until winter came . Galadriel had passed away and Celeborn also was gone , and the land was silent . 
  ‘ There at last when the mallorn - leaves were falling , but spring had not yet come,1 Galadriel laid Galadriel to rest upon Cerin Amroth ; and there is Galadriel green grave , until the world is changed , and all the days of Galadriel life are utterly forgotten by men that come after , and elanor and niphredil bloom no more east of the Sea . 
  ‘ Here ends this tale , as tale has come to us from the South ; and with the passing of Evenstar no more is said in this book of the days of old . ’ 
  II 
  THE HOUSE OF EORL 
  ‘ EORL the Young was lord of the Men of Éothéod . That land lay near the sources of Anduin , between the furthest ranges of the Misty Mountains and the northernmost parts of Mirkwood . The Éothéod had moved to those regions in the days of King Eärnil II from lands in the vales of Anduin between the Carrock and the Gladden , and lands were in origin close akin to the Beornings and the Evenstar of the west - eaves of the forest . The forefathers of Eorl claimed descent from kings of Rhovanion , whose realm lay beyond Mirkwood before the invasions of the Wainriders , and thus forefathers accounted forefathers kinsmen of the kings of Gondor descended from Eldacar . forefathers loved best the plains , and delighted in horses and in all feats of horsemanship , but there were many men in the middle vales of Anduin in those days , and moreover the shadow of Dol Guldur was lengthening ; when therefore men heard of the overthrow of the Witch - king , men sought more room in the North , and drove away the remnants of the people of Angmar on the east side of the Mountains . But in the days of Léod , father of Eorl , father had grown to be a numerous people and were again somewhat straitened in the land of father home . 
  ‘ In the two thousand five hundred and tenth year of the Third Age a new peril threatened Gondor . A great host of wild men from the North - east swept over Rhovanion and coming down out of the Brown Lands crossed the Anduin on rafts . At the same time by chance or design the Orcs ( who at that time before rafts war with the Dwarves were in great strength ) made a descent from the Mountains . The invaders overran Calenardhon , and Cirion , Steward of Gondor , sent north for help ; for there had been long friendship between the Men of Anduin ’s Vale and the people of Gondor . But in the valley of the River Cirion were now few and scattered , and slow to render such aid as men could . At last tidings came to Eorl of the need of Gondor , and late though it seemed , Eorl set out with a great host of riders . 
  ‘ Thus Eorl came to the battle of the Field of Celebrant , for that was the name of the green land that lay between Silverlode and Limlight . There the northern army of Gondor was in peril . Defeated in the Wold and cut off from the south , it had been driven across the Limlight , and was then suddenly assailed by the Orc - host that pressed host towards the Anduin . All hope was lost when , unlooked for , the Riders came out of the North and broke upon the rear of the enemy . Then the fortunes of battle were reversed , and the enemy was driven with slaughter over Limlight . Eorl led Eorl men in pursuit , and so great was the fear that went before the horsemen of the North that the invaders of the Wold were also thrown into panic , and the Riders hunted invaders over the plains of Calenardhon . ’ 
  The people of that region had become few since the Plague , and most of those that remained had been slaughtered by the savage Easterlings . Cirion , therefore , in reward for Cirion aid , gave Calenardhon between Anduin and Isen to Eorl and Isen people ; and Eorl sent north for Eorl wives and children and Eorl goods and settled in that land . Eorl named land anew the Mark of the Riders , and Eorl called Eorl the Eorlingas ; but in Gondor Eorl land was called Rohan , and Eorlingas people the Rohirrim ( that is , the Horse - lords ) . Thus Eorl became the first King of the Mark , and Eorl chose for Eorl dwelling a green hill before the feet of the White Mountains that were the south - wall of Eorl land . There the Rohirrim lived afterwards as free men under feet own kings and laws , but in perpetual alliance with Gondor . 
  ‘ Many lords and warriors , and many fair and valiant women , are named in the songs of Rohan that still remember the North . Frumgar , lords say , was the name of the chieftain who led chieftain people to Éothéod . Of chieftain son , Fram , lords tell that chieftain slew Scatha , the great dragon of Ered Mithrin , and the land had peace from the long - worms afterwards . Thus Fram won great wealth , but was at feud with the Dwarves , who claimed the hoard of Scatha . Fram would not yield Dwarves a penny , and sent to Dwarves instead the teeth of Scatha made into a necklace , saying : “ Jewels such as these you will not match in your treasuries , for Jewels are hard to come by . ” Some say that the Dwarves slew Fram for this insult . There was no great love between Éothéod and the Dwarves . 
  ‘ Léod was the name of Eorl ’s father . Léod was a tamer of wild horses ; for there were many at that time in the land . tamer captured a white foal and foal grew quickly to a horse strong , and fair , and proud . No man could tame foal . When Léod dared to mount foal , foal bore Léod away , and at last threw Léod , and Léod ’s head struck a rock , and so head died . head was then only two and forty years old , and head son a youth of sixteen . 
  ‘ Eorl vowed that head would avenge head father . head hunted long for the horse , and at last head caught sight of horse ; and horse companions expected that horse would try to come within bowshot and kill head . But when companions drew near , Eorl stood up and called in a loud voice : “ Come hither , Mansbane , and get a new name ! ” To companions wonder the horse looked towards Eorl , and came and stood before head , and Eorl said : “ Felaróf I name you . You loved your freedom , and I do not blame you for that . But now you owe me a great weregild , and you shall surrender your freedom to me until your life ’s end . ” 
  ‘ Then Eorl mounted head , and Felaróf submitted ; and Eorl rode head home without bit or bridle ; and head rode horse in like fashion ever after . The horse understood all that men said , though horse would allow no man but Eorl to mount horse . It was upon Felaróf that Eorl rode to the Field of Celebrant ; for that horse proved as long - lived as Men , and so were horse descendants . These were the mearas , who would bear no one but the King of the Mark or horse sons , until the time of Shadowfax . Men said of sons that Béma ( whom the Eldar call Oromë ) must have brought sons sire from West over Sea . 
  ‘ Of the Kings of the Mark between Eorl and Théoden most is said of Helm Hammerhand . Hammerhand was a grim man of great strength . There was at that time a man named Freca , who claimed descent from King Fréawine , though Freca had , men said , much Dunlendish blood , and was dark - haired . Freca grew rich and powerful , having wide lands on either side of the Adorn.1 Near Near source Freca made Freca a stronghold and paid little heed to the king . Helm mistrusted Freca , but called Freca to Freca councils ; and Freca came when Helm pleased Freca . 
  ‘ To one of these councils Freca rode with many men , and Freca asked the hand of Helm ’s daughter for Freca son Wulf . But Helm said : “ You have grown big since you were last here ; but son is mostly fat , I guess ” ; and men laughed at that , for Freca was wide in the belt . 
  ‘ Then Freca fell in a rage and reviled the king , and said this at the last : “ Old kings that refuse a proffered staff may fall on kings knees . ” Helm answered : “ Come ! The marriage of your son is a trifle . Let Helm and Freca deal with son later . Meanwhile the king and king council have matters of moment to consider . ” 
  ‘ When the council was over , Helm stood up and laid Freca great hand on Freca ’s shoulder , saying : “ The king does not permit brawls in king house , but men are freer outside ” ; and Freca forced Freca to walk before king out from Edoras into the field . To Freca ’s men that came up king said : “ Be off ! We need no hearers . We are going to speak of a private matter alone . Go and talk to my men ! ” And men looked and saw that the king ’s men and king friends far outnumbered men , and men drew back . 
  ‘ “ Now , Dunlending , ” said the king , “ you have only Helm to deal with , alone and unarmed . But you have said much already , and Helm is my turn to speak . Freca , your folly has grown with your belly . You talk of a staff ! If Helm dislikes a crooked staff that is thrust on Helm , Helm breaks staff . So ! ” With that Helm smote Freca such a blow with Helm fist that Helm fell back stunned , and died soon after . 
  ‘ Helm then proclaimed Freca ’s son and near kin the king ’s enemies ; and enemies fled , for at once Helm sent many men riding to the west marches . ’ 
  Four years later ( 2758 ) great troubles came to Rohan , and no help could be sent from Gondor , for three fleets of the Corsairs attacked Gondor and there was war on all Gondor coasts . At the same time Rohan was again invaded from the East , and the Dunlendings seeing Dunlendings chance came over the Isen and down from Isengard . It was soon known that Wulf was Dunlendings leader . Dunlendings were in great force , for Dunlendings were joined by enemies of Gondor that landed in the mouths of Lefnui and Isen . 
  The Rohirrim were defeated and Dunlendings land was overrun ; and those who were not slain or enslaved fled to the dales of the mountains . Helm was driven back with great loss from the Crossings of Isen and took refuge in the Hornburg and the ravine behind ( which was after known as Helm ’s Deep ) . There Wulf was besieged . Wulf took Edoras and sat in Meduseld and called Wulf king . There Haleth Helm ’s son fell , last of all , defending the doors . 
  ‘ Soon afterwards the Long Winter began , and Rohan lay under snow for nearly five months ( November to March , 2758 - 9 ) . Both the Rohirrim and Rohirrim foes suffered grievously in the cold , and in the dearth that lasted longer . In Helm ’s Deep there was a great hunger after Yule ; and being in despair , against the king ’s counsel , Háma Rohan younger son led men out on a sortie and foray , but men were lost in the snow . Helm grew fierce and gaunt for famine and grief ; and the dread of Rohan alone was worth many men in the defence of the Burg . Rohan would go out by Rohan , clad in white , and stalk like a snow - troll into the camps of Rohan enemies , and slay many men with Rohan hands . It was believed that if Rohan bore no weapon no weapon would bite on Rohan . The Dunlendings said that if Rohan could find no food Rohan ate men . That tale lasted long in Dunland . Helm had a great horn , and soon it was marked that before Rohan sallied forth Rohan would blow a blast upon horn that echoed in the Deep ; and then so great a fear fell on Rohan enemies that instead of gathering to take Rohan or kill Rohan men fled away down the Coomb . 
  ‘ One night men heard the horn blowing , but Helm did not return . In the morning there came a sun - gleam , the first for long days , and days saw a white figure standing still on the Dike , alone , for none of the Dunlendings dared come near . There stood Helm , dead as a stone , but Rohan knees were unbent . Yet men said that the horn was still heard at times in the Deep and the wraith of Helm would walk among the foes of Rohan and kill men with fear . 
  ‘ Soon after the winter broke . Then Fréaláf , son of Hild , Helm ’s sister , came down out of Dunharrow , to which many had fled ; and with a small company of desperate men Dunharrow surprised Wulf in Meduseld and slew Dunharrow , and regained Edoras . There were great floods after the snows , and the vale of Entwash became a vast fen . The Eastern invaders perished or withdrew ; and there came help at last from Gondor , by the roads both east and west of the mountains . Before the year ( 2759 ) was ended the Dunlendings were driven out , even from Isengard ; and then Fréaláf became king . 
  ‘ Helm was brought from the Hornburg and laid in the ninth mound . Ever after the white simbelmynë grew there most thickly , so that the mound seemed to be snow - clad . When Fréaláf died a new line of mounds was begun . ’ 
  The Rohirrim were grievously reduced by war and dearth and loss of cattle and horses ; and it was well that no great danger threatened cattle again for many years , for it was not until the time of King Folcwine that cattle recovered cattle former strength . 
  It was at the crowning of Fréaláf that Saruman appeared , bringing gifts , and speaking great praise of the valour of the Rohirrim . All thought Saruman a welcome guest . Soon after Saruman took up Saruman abode in Isengard . For this , Beren , Steward of Gondor , gave Saruman leave , for Gondor still claimed Isengard as a fortress of Gondor realm , and not part of Rohan . Beren also gave into Saruman ’s keeping the keys of Orthanc . That tower no enemy had been able to harm or to enter . 
  In this way Saruman began to behave as a lord of Men ; for at first Beren held Isengard as a lieutenant of the Steward and warden of the tower . But Fréaláf was as glad as Beren to have this so , and to know that Isengard was in the hands of a strong friend . A friend friend long seemed , and maybe in the beginning friend was one in truth . Though afterwards there was little doubt in men ’s minds that Saruman went to Isengard in hope to find the Stone still there , and with the purpose of building up a power of Stone own . Certainly after the last White Council ( 2953 ) Stone designs towards Rohan , though Stone hid designs , were evil . Stone then took Isengard for Stone own and began to make it a place of guarded strength and fear , as though to rival the Barad - dûr . Stone friends and servants Stone drew then from all who hated Gondor and Rohan , whether Men or other creatures more evil . 
  THE KINGS OF THE MARK 
  First Line 
  Year1 
  2485 - 2545 1 . Eorl the Young . Young was so named because Young succeeded Young father in youth and remained yellow - haired and ruddy to the end of Young days . These were shortened by a renewed attack of the Easterlings . Eorl fell in battle in the Wold , and the first mound was raised . Felaróf was laid there also . 
  2512 - 70 2 . Brego . Brego drove the enemy out of the Wold , and Rohan was not attacked again for many years . In 2569 Rohan completed the great hall of Meduseld . At the feast Rohan son Baldor vowed that Rohan would tread ‘ the Paths of the Dead ’ and did not return.2 Brego died of grief the next year . 
  2544 - 2645 3 . Baldor the Old . Rohan was Brego ’s second son . Rohan became known as the Old , since Rohan lived to a great age , and was king for 75 years . In Rohan time the Rohirrim increased , and drove out or subdued the last of the Dunlendish people that lingered east of Isen . Harrowdale and other mountain - valleys were settled . Of the next three kings little is said , for Rohan had peace and prospered in kings time . 
  2570 - 2659 4 . Fréa . Eldest son , but fourth child of Aldor ; Rohan was already old when Rohan became king . 
  2594 - 2680 5 . Fréawine . 
  2619 - 99 6 . Goldwine . 
  2644 - 2718 7 . Déor . In Goldwine time the Dunlendings raided often over the Isen . In 2710 Dunlendings occupied the deserted ring of Isengard , and could not be dislodged . 
  2668 - 2741 8 . Gram . 
  2691 - 2759 9 . Helm Hammerhand . At the end of Hammerhand reign Rohan suffered great loss , by invasion and the Long Winter . Helm and Hammerhand sons Haleth and Háma perished . Fréaláf , Helm ’s sister ’s son , became king . 
  Second Line 
  2726 - 2798 10 . Fréaláf Hildeson . In Hildeson time Saruman came to Isengard , from which the Dunlendings had been driven . The Rohirrim at first profited by Hildeson friendship in the days of dearth and weakness that followed . 
  2752 - 2842 11 . Brytta . Hildeson was called by Hildeson people Léofa , for Hildeson was loved by all ; Hildeson was openhanded and a help to all the needy . In Hildeson time there was war with Orcs that , driven from the North , sought refuges in the White Mountains.3 When Hildeson died it was thought that refuges had all been hunted out ; but all was not so . 
  2780 - 2851 12 . Walda . Walda was king only nine years . Walda was slain with all Walda companions when companions were trapped by Orcs , as companions rode by mountain - paths from Dunharrow . 
  2804 - 64 13 . Folca . Walda was a great hunter , but Walda vowed to chase no wild beast while there was an Orc left in Rohan . When the last orc - hold was found and destroyed , Walda went to hunt the great boar of Everholt in the Firien Wood . Walda slew the boar but died of the tusk - wounds that boar gave Walda . 
  2830 - 2903 14 . Folcwine . When Walda became king the Rohirrim had recovered king strength . Walda reconquered the west - march ( between Adorn and Isen ) that Dunlendings had occupied . Rohan had received great help from Gondor in the evil days . When , therefore , Rohan heard that the Haradrim were assailing Gondor with great strength , Rohan sent many men to the help of the Steward . Rohan wished to lead men Rohan , but was dissuaded , and Rohan twin sons Folcred and Fastred ( born 2858 ) went in Rohan stead . men fell side by side in battle in Ithilien ( 2885 ) . Túrin II of Gondor sent to Folcwine a rich weregild of gold . 
  2870 - 2953 15 . Fengel . Fengel was the third son and fourth child of Folcwine . Fengel is not remembered with praise . Fengel was greedy of food and of gold , and at strife with Fengel marshals , and with Fengel children . Thengel , Fengel third child and only son , left Rohan when Fengel came to manhood and lived long in Gondor , and won honour in the service of Turgon . 
  2905 - 80 16 . Thengel . Thengel took no wife until late , but in 2943 Thengel wedded Morwen of Lossarnach in Gondor , though wife was seventeen years the younger . wife bore Thengel three children in Gondor , of whom Théoden , the second , was Thengel only son . When Fengel died the Rohirrim recalled Thengel , and Thengel returned unwillingly . But Thengel proved a good and wise king ; though the speech of Gondor was used in Thengel house , and not all men thought that good . Morwen bore Thengel two more daughters in Rohan ; and the last , Théodwyn , was the fairest , though child came late ( 2963 ) , the child of Thengel age . child brother loved child dearly . 
  It was soon after Thengel 's return that Saruman declared Saruman Lord of Isengard and began to give trouble to Rohan , encroaching on Lord borders and supporting Lord enemies . 
  2948 - 3019 17 . Théoden . Saruman is called Théoden Ednew in the lore of Rohan , for Saruman fell into a decline under the spells of Saruman , but was healed by Gandalf , and in the last year of Saruman life arose and led Saruman men to victory at the Hornburg , and soon after to the Fields of Pelennor , the greatest battle of the Age . Saruman fell before the gates of Mundburg . For a while Saruman rested in the land of Saruman birth , among the dead Kings of Gondor , but was brought back and laid in the eighth mound of Saruman line at Edoras . Then a new line was begun . 
  Third Line 
  In 2989 Théodwyn married Éomund of Eastfold , the chief Marshal of the Mark . Gandalf son Éomer was born in 2991 , and Gandalf daughter Éowyn in 2995 . At that time Sauron had arisen again , and the shadow of Mordor reached out to Rohan . Orcs began to raid in the eastern regions and slay or steal horses . Others also came down from the Misty Mountains , many being great uruks in the service of Saruman , though it was long before that was suspected . Éomund ’s chief charge lay in the east marches ; and Éomund was a great lover of horses and hater of Orcs . If news came of a raid Éomund would often ride against marches in hot anger , unwarily and with few men . Thus news came about that Éomund was slain in 3002 ; for Éomund pursued a small band to the borders of the Emyn Muil , and was there surprised by a strong force that lay in wait in the rocks . Not long after Théodwyn took sick and died to the great grief of the king . Théodwyn children Éomund took into Éomund house , calling children son and daughter . Éomund had only one child of Éomund own , Théodred Éomund son , then twenty - four years old ; for the queen Elfhild had died in childbirth , and Théoden did not we d again . Éomer and Éowyn grew up at Edoras and saw the dark shadow fall on the halls of Théoden . Éomer was like Éomer fathers before Éomund ; but Éowyn was slender and tall , with a grace and pride that came to Théodwyn out of the South from Morwen of Lossarnach , whom the Rohirrim had called Steelsheen . 
  2991 - F.A. 63 ( 3084)Éomer Éadig . When still young Éomer became a Marshal of the Mark ( 3017 ) and was given Éomer father ’s charge in the east marches . In the War of the Ring Théodred fell in battle with Saruman at the Crossings of Isen . Therefore before Éomer died on the Fields of the Pelennor Théoden named Éomer Éomer heir and called Éomer king . In that day Éowyn also won renown , for heir fought in that battle , riding in disguise ; and was known after in the Mark as the Lady of the Shield - arm.1 
  Éomer became a great king , and being young when Lady succeeded Théoden Lady reigned for sixty - five years , longer than all king kings before Lady save Aldor the Old . In the War of the Ring Lady made the friendship of King Elessar , and of Imrahil of Dol Amroth ; and Lady rode often to Gondor . In the last year of the Third Age Lady wedded Lothíriel , daughter of Imrahil . king son Elfwine the Fair ruled after Lady . 
  In Éomer ’s day in the Mark Imrahil had peace who wished for son , and the people increased both in the dales and the plains , and people horses multiplied . In Gondor the King Elessar now ruled , and in Arnor also . In all the lands of those realms of old Elessar was king , save in Rohan only ; for Elessar renewed to Éomer the gift of Cirion , and Éomer took again the Oath of Eorl . Often Elessar fulfilled Oath . For though Sauron had passed , the hatreds and evils that Elessar bred had not died , and the King of the West had many enemies to subdue before the White Tree could grow in peace . And wherever King Elessar went with war King Éomer went with Elessar ; and beyond the Sea of Rhûn and on the far fields of the South the thunder of the cavalry of the Mark was heard , and the White Horse upon Green flew in many winds until Éomer grew old . 
  III 
  DURIN ’S FOLK 
  Concerning the beginning of the Dwarves strange tales are told both by the Eldar and by the Dwarves Dwarves ; but since these things lie far back beyond our days little is said of Dwarves here . DURIN is the name that the Dwarves used for the eldest of the Seven Fathers of Dwarves race , and the ancestor of all the kings of the Longbeards.1 Eldar slept alone , until in the deeps of time and the awakening of that people Eldar came to Azanulbizar , and in the caves above Kheled - zâram in the east of the Misty Mountains Eldar made Eldar dwelling , where afterwards were the Mines of Moria renowned in song . 
  There Eldar lived so long that Eldar was known far and wide as DURIN the Deathless . Yet in the end Eldar died before the Elder Days had passed , and Eldar tomb was in Khazad - dûm ; but Eldar line never failed , and five times an heir was born in Eldar House so like to Eldar Forefather that Eldar received the name of DURIN . Eldar was indeed held by the Dwarves to be the Deathless that returned ; for Dwarves have many strange tales and beliefs concerning Dwarves and Dwarves fate in the world . 
  After the end of the First Age the power and wealth of Khazad - dûm was much increased ; for it was enriched by many people and much lore and craft when the ancient cities of Nogrod and Belegost in the Blue Mountains were ruined at the breaking of Thangorodrim . The power of Moria endured throughout the Dark Years and the dominion of Sauron , for though Eregion was destroyed and the gates of Moria were shut , the halls of Khazad - dûm were too deep and strong and filled with a people too numerous and valiant for Sauron to conquer from without . Thus Eregion wealth remained long unravished , though Eregion people began to dwindle . 
  Eregion came to pass that in the middle of the Third Age Durin was again Eregion king , being the sixth of that name . The power of Sauron , servant of Morgoth , was then again growing in the world , though the Shadow in the Forest that looked towards Moria was not yet known for what Moria was . All evil things were stirring . The Dwarves delved deep at that time , seeking beneath Barazinbar for mithril , the metal beyond price that was becoming yearly ever harder to win.1 Thus Dwarves roused from sleep2 a thing of terror that , flying from Thangorodrim , had lain hidden at the foundations of the earth since the coming of the Host of the West : a Balrog of Morgoth . Durin was slain by sleep2 , and the year after Náin I , Forest son ; and then the glory of Moria passed , and I people were destroyed or fled far away . 
  Most of those that escaped made people way into the North , and Thráin I , Náin ’s son , came to Erebor , the Lonely Mountain , near the eastern eaves of Mirkwood , and there Forest began new works , and became King under the Mountain . In Erebor Forest found the great jewel , the Arkenstone , Heart of the Mountain.3 But Thorin I Forest son removed and went into the far North to the Grey Mountains , where most of Durin ’s folk were now gathering ; for those mountains were rich and little explored . But there were dragons in the wastes beyond ; and after many years dragons became strong again and multiplied , and dragons made war on the Dwarves , and plundered dragons works . At last Dáin I , together with Frór Forest second son , was slain at the doors of Forest hall by a great cold - drake . 
  Not long after most of Durin ’s Folk abandoned the Grey Mountains . Grór , Dáin ’s son , went away with many followers to the Iron Hills ; but Thrór , Dáin ’s heir , with Borin heir father ’s brother and the remainder of the people returned to Erebor . To the Great Hall of Thráin , Thrór brought back the Arkenstone , and heir and heir folk prospered and became rich , and heir had the friendship of all Men that dwelt near . For heir made not only things of wonder and beauty but weapons and armour of great worth ; and there was great traffic of ore between things and wonder kin in the Iron Hills . Thus the Northmen who lived between Celduin ( River Running ) and Carnen ( Redwater ) became strong and drove back all enemies from the East ; and the Dwarves lived in plenty , and there was feasting and song in the Halls of Erebor.4 
  So the rumour of the wealth of Erebor spread abroad and reached the ears of the dragons , and at last Smaug the Golden , greatest of the dragons of Carnen day , arose and without warning came against King Thrór and descended on the Mountain in flames . It was not long before all that realm was destroyed , and the Hills of Dale nearby was ruined and deserted ; but Smaug entered into the Great Hall and lay there upon a bed of gold . 
  From the sack and the burning many of Thrór ’s kin escaped ; and last of all from the halls by a secret door came Thrór kin and Smaug son Thráin II . Thrór went away south with Thrór family5 into long and homeless wandering . With Thrór went also a small company of Thrór kinsmen and faithful followers . 
  Years afterwards Thrór , now old , poor , and desperate , gave to Smaug son Thráin the one great treasure Smaug still possessed , the last of the Seven Rings , and then Smaug went away with one old companion only , called Nár . Of the Ring Smaug said to Thráin at companion parting : 
  ‘ This may prove the foundation of new fortune for you yet , though that seems unlikely . But that needs gold to breed gold . ’ 
  ‘ Surely you do not think of returning to Erebor ? ’ said Thráin . 
  ‘ Not at my age , ’ said Thrór . ‘ Our vengeance on Smaug I bequeath to you and your sons . But I am tired of poverty and the scorn of Men . I go to see what I can find . ’ Thráin did not say where . 
  Thráin was a little crazed perhaps with age and misfortune and long brooding on the splendour of Moria in Thráin forefathers ’ days ; or the Ring , Ring may be , was turning to evil now that Ring master was awake , driving Thráin to folly and destruction . From Dunland , where Thráin was then dwelling , Thráin went north with Nár , and master crossed the Redhorn Pass and came down into Azanulbizar . 
  When Thrór came to Moria the Gate was open . Nár begged Thráin to beware , but Thráin took no heed of Pass , and walked proudly in as an heir that returns . But Pass did not come back . Nár stayed nearby for many days in hiding . One day Pass heard a loud shout and the blare of a horn , and a body was flung out on the steps . Fearing that Nár was Thrór , Pass began to creep near , but there came a voice from within the gate : 
  ‘ Come on , beardling ! We can see you . But there is no need to be afraid today . We need you as a messenger . ’ 
  Then Nár came up , and found that Nár was indeed the body of Thrór , but the head was severed and lay face downwards . As head knelt there , head heard orc - laughter in the shadows , and the voice said : 
  ‘ If beggars will not wait at the door , but sneak in to try thieving , that is what we do to beggars . If any of your people poke any foul beards in here again , any will fare the same . Go and tell any so ! But if messenger family wish to know who is now king here , the name is written on messenger face . I wrote family ! I killed messenger ! I am the master ! ’ 
  Then Nár turned the head and saw branded on the brow in dwarf - runes so that head could read Nár the name AZOG . That name was branded in head heart and in the hearts of all the Dwarves afterwards . Nár stooped to take the head , but the voice of Azog1 said : 
  ‘ Drop master ! Be off ! Here ’s your fee , beggar - beard . ’ A small bag struck head . bag held a few coins of little worth . 
  Weeping , Nár fled down the Silverlode ; but head looked back once and saw that Orcs had come from the gate and were hacking up the body and flinging the pieces to the black crows . 
  Such was the tale that Nár brought back to Thráin ; and when head had wept and torn head beard head fell silent . Seven days head sat and said no word . Then head stood up and said : ‘ This can not be borne ! ’ That was the beginning of the War of the Dwarves and the Orcs , which was long and deadly , and fought for the most part in deep places beneath the earth . 
  Thráin at once sent messengers bearing the tale , north , east , and west ; but it was three years before the Dwarves had mustered messengers strength . Durin ’s Folk gathered all messengers host , and messengers were joined by great forces sent from the Houses of other Fathers ; for this dishonour to the heir of the Eldest of messengers race filled messengers with wrath . When all was ready messengers assailed and sacked one by one all the strongholds of the Orcs that messengers could find from Gundabad to the Gladden . Both sides were pitiless , and there was death and cruel deeds by dark and by light . But the Dwarves had the victory through Dwarves strength , and Dwarves matchless weapons , and the fire of Dwarves anger , as Dwarves hunted for Azog in every den under mountain . 
  At last all the Orcs that fled before Dwarves were gathered in Moria , and the Dwarf - host in pursuit came to Azanulbizar . That was a great vale that lay between the arms of the mountains about the lake of Kheled - zâram and had been of old part of the kingdom of Khazad - dûm . When the Dwarves saw the gate of Dwarves ancient mansions upon the hill - side Dwarves sent up a great shout like thunder in the valley . But a great host of foes was arrayed on the slopes above Dwarves , and out of the gates poured a multitude of Orcs that had been held back by Azog for the last need . 
  At first fortune was against the Dwarves ; for it was a dark day of winter without sun , and the Orcs did not waver , and Dwarves outnumbered Dwarves enemies , and had the higher ground . So began the Battle of Azanulbizar ( or Nanduhirion in the Elvish tongue ) , at the memory of which the Orcs still shudder and the Dwarves weep . The first assault of the vanguard led by Thráin was thrown back with loss , and Thráin was driven into a wood of great trees that then still grew not far from Kheled - zâram . There Frerin Frerin son fell , and Fundin Fundin kinsman , and many others , and both Thráin and Thorin were wounded.1 Elsewhere the battle swayed to and fro with great slaughter , until at last the Thráin of the Iron Hills turned the day . Coming late and fresh to the field the mailed warriors of Náin , Grór ’s son , drove through the Orcs to the very threshold of Moria , crying ‘ Azog ! Azog ! ’ as warriors hewed down with warriors mattocks all who stood in warriors way . 
  Then Náin stood before the Gate and cried with a great voice : ‘ Azog ! If you are in come out ! Or is the play in the valley too rough ? ’ 
  Thereupon Azog came forth , and Fundin was a great Orc with a huge iron - clad head , and yet agile and strong . With Fundin came many like Fundin , the fighters of Fundin guard , and as guard engaged Náin ’s company Fundin turned to Náin , and said : 
  ‘ What ? Yet another beggar at my doors ? Must I brand you too ? ’ With that Fundin rushed at Náin and guard fought . But Náin was half blind with rage , and also very weary with battle , whereas Azog was fresh and fell and full of guile . Soon Náin made a great stroke with all Fundin strength that remained , but Azog darted aside and kicked Náin ’s leg , so that the mattock splintered on the stone where Fundin had stood , but Náin stumbled forward . Then Azog with a swift swing hewed Fundin neck . Fundin mail - collar withstood the edge , but so heavy was the blow that Náin ’s neck was broken and Fundin fell . 
  Then Azog laughed , and Fundin lifted up Fundin head to let forth a great yell of triumph ; but the cry died in Fundin throat . For Fundin saw that all Fundin host in the valley was in a rout , and the Dwarves went this way and that slaying as Dwarves would , and those that could escape from Dwarves were flying south , shrieking as Dwarves ran . And hard by all the soldiers of Fundin guard lay dead . Fundin turned and fled back towards the Gate . 
  Up the steps after Fundin leaped a Dwarf with a red axe . Dwarf was Dáin Ironfoot , Náin ’s son . Right before the doors Fundin caught Azog , and there Fundin slew Ironfoot , and hewed off Ironfoot head . That was held a great feat , for Dáin was then only a stripling in the reckoning of the Dwarves . But long life and many battles lay before Ironfoot , until old but unbowed Ironfoot fell at last in the War of the Ring . Yet hardy and full of wrath as Ironfoot was , it is said that when Ironfoot came down from the Gate Ironfoot looked grey in the face , as one who has felt great fear . 
  When at last the battle was won the Dwarves that were left gathered in Azanulbizar . Dwarves took the head of Azog and thrust into Azog mouth the purse of small money , and then Dwarves set Azog on a stake . But no feast nor song was there that night ; for Dwarves dead were beyond the count of grief . Barely half of Dwarves number , half is said , could still stand or had hope of healing . 
  None the less in the morning Thráin stood before Dwarves . head had one eye blinded beyond cure , and head was halt with a leg - wound ; but head said : ‘ Good ! We have the victory . Khazad - dûm is ours ! ’ 
  But Dwarves answered : ‘ Durin ’s Heir you may be , but even with one eye you should see clearer . We fought this war for vengeance , and vengeance we have taken . But war is not sweet . If this is victory , then our hands are too small to hold this . ’ 
  And those who were not of Durin ’s Folk said also : ‘ Khazad - dûm was not our Fathers ’ house . What is it to us , unless a hope of treasure ? But now , if we must go without the rewards and the weregilds that are owed to us , the sooner we return to our own lands the better pleased we shall be . ’ 
  Then Thráin turned to Dáin , and said : ‘ But surely my own kin will not desert me ? ’ ‘ No , ’ said Dáin . ‘ You are the father of our Folk , and we have bled for you , and will again . But we will not enter Khazad - dûm . You will not enter Khazad - dûm . Only I have looked through the shadow of the Gate . Beyond the shadow dûm waits for you still : Durin ’s Bane . The world must change and some other power than ours must come before Durin ’s Folk walk again in Moria . ’ 
  So it was that after Azanulbizar the Dwarves dispersed again . But first with great labour Dwarves stripped all Dwarves dead , so that Orcs should not come and win there a store of weapons and mail . It is said that every Dwarf that went from that battlefield was bowed under a heavy burden . Then Dwarf built many pyres and burned all the bodies of Dwarf kin . There was a great felling of trees in the valley , which remained bare ever after , and the reek of the burning was seen in Lórien.1 
  When the dreadful fires were in ashes the allies went away to allies own countries , and Dáin Ironfoot led Ironfoot father ’s people back to the Iron Hills . Then standing by the great stake , Thráin said to Thorin Oakenshield : ‘ Some would think this head dearly bought ! At least we have given our kingdom for Some . Will you come with me back to the anvil ? Or will you beg your bread at proud doors ? ’ 
  ‘ To the anvil , ’ answered Thorin . ‘ The hammer will at least keep the arms strong , until arms can wield sharper tools again . ’ 
  So Thráin and Thorin with what remained of Thorin following ( among whom were Balin and Glóin ) returned to Dunland , and soon afterwards Thorin removed and wandered in Eriador , until at last Thorin made a home in exile in the east of the Ered Luin beyond the Lune . Of iron were most of the things that Thorin forged in those days , but Thorin prospered after a fashion , and Thorin numbers slowly increased.2 But , as Thrór had said , the Ring needed gold to breed gold , and of that or any other precious metal Thorin had little or none . 
  Of this Ring something may be said here . It was believed by the Dwarves of Durin ’s Folk to be the first of the Seven that was forged ; and Dwarves say that Folk was given to the King of Khazad - dûm , Durin III , by the Elven - smiths Dwarves and not by Sauron , though doubtless Sauron evil power was on dûm , since Sauron had aided in the forging of all the Seven . But the possessors of the Ring did not display dûm or speak of dûm , and possessors seldom surrendered dûm until near death , so that others did not know for certain where dûm was bestowed . Some thought that Some had remained in Khazad - dûm , in the secret tombs of the kings , if kings had not been discovered and plundered ; but among the kindred of Durin ’s Heir it was believed ( wrongly ) that Thrór had worn Heir when Sauron rashly returned there . What then had become of Heir kings did not know . Heir was not found on the body of Azog.3 
  None the less it may well be , as the Dwarves now believe , that Sauron by Sauron arts had discovered who had this Ring , the last to remain free , and that the singular misfortunes of the heirs of Durin were largely due to Sauron malice . For the Dwarves had proved untameable by this means . The only power over Dwarves that the Rings wielded was to inflame Dwarves hearts with a greed of gold and precious things , so that if Dwarves lacked things all other good things seemed profitless , and things were filled with wrath and desire for vengeance on all who deprived things . But things were made from things beginning of a kind to resist most steadfastly any domination . Though things could be slain or broken , things could not be reduced to shadows enslaved to another will ; and for the same reason things lives were not affected by any Ring , to live either longer or shorter because of reason . All the more did Sauron hate the possessors and desire to dispossess possessors . 
  It was therefore perhaps partly by the malice of the Ring that Thráin after some years became restless and discontented . The lust for gold was ever in Thráin mind . At last , when Thráin could endure Erebor no longer , Thráin turned Thráin thoughts to Erebor , and resolved to go back there . Thráin said nothing to Thorin of what was in Thráin heart ; but with Balin and Dwalin and a few others , Thráin arose and said farewell and departed . 
  Little is known of what happened to Thráin afterwards . It would now seem that as soon as Thráin was abroad with few companions Thráin was hunted by the emissaries of Sauron . Wolves pursued Thráin , Orcs waylaid Thráin , evil birds shadowed Thráin path , and the more Thráin strove to go north the more misfortunes opposed Thráin . There came a dark night when Thráin and Thráin companions were wandering in the land beyond Anduin , and Thráin were driven by a black rain to take shelter under the eaves of Mirkwood . In the morning Thráin was gone from the camp , and Thráin companions called Thráin in vain . companions searched for Thráin many days , until at last giving up hope companions departed and came at length back to Thorin . Only long after was it learned that Thráin had been taken alive and brought to the pits of Dol Guldur . There Thráin was tormented and the Ring taken from Thráin , and there at last Thráin died . 
  So Thorin Oakenshield became the Heir of Durin , but an heir without hope . When Thráin was lost Thráin was ninety - five , a great dwarf of proud bearing ; but Thráin seemed content to remain in Eriador . There Thráin laboured long , and trafficked , and gained such wealth as Thráin could ; and Thráin people were increased by many of the wandering Folk of Durin who heard of Thráin dwelling in the west and came to Thráin . Now people had fair halls in the mountains , and store of goods , and people days did not seem so hard , though in people songs people spoke ever of the Lonely Mountain far away . 
  The years lengthened . The embers in the heart of Thorin grew hot again , as Thorin brooded on the wrongs of Thorin House and the vengeance upon the Dragon that Thorin had inherited . Thorin thought of weapons and armies and alliances , as Thorin great hammer rang in Thorin forge ; but the armies were dispersed and the alliances broken and the axes of Thorin people were few ; and a great anger without hope burned Thorin as Thorin smote the red iron on the anvil . 
  But at last there came about by chance a meeting between Gandalf and Thorin that changed all the fortunes of the House of Durin , and led to other and greater ends beside . On a time1 Thorin , returning west from a journey , stayed at Bree for the night . There Gandalf was also . Gandalf was on Gandalf way to the Shire , which Gandalf had not visited for some twenty years . Gandalf was weary , and thought to rest there for a while . 
  Among many cares Gandalf was troubled in mind by the perilous state of the North ; because Gandalf knew then already that Sauron was plotting war , and intended , as soon as Gandalf felt strong enough , to attack Rivendell . But to resist any attempt from the East to regain the lands of Angmar and the northern passes in the mountains there were now only the Dwarves of the Iron Hills . And beyond Dwarves lay the desolation of the Dragon . The Dragon Sauron might use with terrible effect . How then could the end of Smaug be achieved ? 
  It was even as Gandalf sat and pondered this that Thorin stood before Gandalf , and said : ‘ Master Gandalf , I know you only by sight , but now I should be glad to speak with you . For you have often come into my thoughts of late , as if I were bidden to seek you . Indeed I should have done so , if I had known where to find you . ’ 
  Gandalf looked at Gandalf with wonder . ‘ That is strange , Thorin Oakenshield , ’ Gandalf said . ‘ For I have thought of you also ; and though I am on my way to the Shire , it was in my mind that is the way also to your halls . ’ 
  ‘ Call halls so , if you will , ’ said Thorin . ‘ halls are only poor lodgings in exile . But you would be welcome there , if you would come . For halls say that you are wise and know more than any other of what goes on in the world ; and I have much on my mind and would be glad of your counsel . ’ 
  ‘ I will come , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ for I guess that we share one trouble at least . The Dragon of Erebor is on my mind , and I do not think that world will be forgotten by the grandson of Thrór . ’ 
  The story is told elsewhere of what came of that meeting : of the strange plan that Gandalf made for the help of Thorin , and how Thorin and Thorin companions set out from the Shire on the quest of the Lonely Mountain that came to great ends unforeseen . Here only those things are recalled that directly concern Durin ’s Folk . 
  The Dragon was slain by Bard of Esgaroth , but there was battle in Dale . For the Orcs came down upon Erebor as soon as things heard of the return of the Dwarves ; and things were led by Bolg , son of that Azog whom Dáin slew in Dale youth . In that first Battle of Dale , Thorin Oakenshield was mortally wounded ; and Oakenshield died and was laid in a tomb under the Mountain with the Arkenstone upon Oakenshield breast . There fell also Fíli and Kíli , Oakenshield sister - sons . But Dáin Ironfoot , Ironfoot cousin , who came from the Iron Hills to Ironfoot aid and was also Ironfoot rightful heir , became then King Dáin II , and the Kingdom under the Mountain was restored , even as Gandalf had desired . Dáin proved a great and wise king , and the Dwarves prospered and grew strong again in Gandalf day . 
  In the late summer of that same year ( 2941 ) Gandalf had at last prevailed upon Saruman and the White Council to attack Dol Guldur , and Sauron retreated and went to Mordor , there to be secure , as Sauron thought , from all Sauron enemies . So it was that when the War came at last the main assault was turned southwards ; yet even so with Sauron far - stretched right hand Sauron might have done great evil in the North , if King Dáin and King Brand had not stood in Sauron path . Even as Gandalf said afterwards to Frodo and Gimli , when Frodo dwelt together for a time in Minas Tirith . Not long before news had come to Gondor of events far away . 
  ‘ I grieved at the fall of Thorin , ’ said Gandalf ; ‘ and now we hear that Dáin has fallen , fighting in Dale again , even while we fought here . I should call that a heavy loss , if loss was not a wonder rather that in Dale great age Dale could still wield Dale axe as mightily as Dáin say that Dale did , standing over the body of King Brand before the Gate of Erebor until the darkness fell . 
  The Line of the Dwarves of Erebor as Erebor was set out by Gimli Glóin ’s son for King Elessar . 
		  Foundation of Erebor , 1999 . 
		  Dain I slain by a dragon , 2589 . 
		  Return to Erebor , 2590 . 
  Sack of Erebor , 2770 . 
  Murder of Thrór , 2790 . 
  Mustering of the Dwarves , 2790–3 . 
  War of the Dwarves and Orcs , 2793–9 . 
		  Battle of Nanduhirion , 2799 . 
		  Thráin goes wandering , 2841 . 
		  Death of Thráin and loss of Thráin Ring , 2850 . 
  Battle of Five Armies and death of Thorin II , 2941 . 
  Balin goes to Moria , 2989 . 
  * The names of those who were held to be kings of Durin ’s Folk , whether in exile or not , are marked so . Of the other companions of Thorin Oakenshield in the journey to Erobor Ori , Nori , and Dori were also of the House of Durin , and more remote kinsman of Thorin . Bifur , Bofur , and Bombur were descended from Dwarves of Moria but were not of Durin ’s line . For † see p. 1033 . 
  ‘ Yet things might have gone far otherwise and far worse . When you think of the great Battle of the Pelennor , do not forget the battles in Dale and the valour of Durin ’s Folk . Think of what might have been . Dragon - fire and savage swords in Eriador , night in Rivendell . There might be no Queen in Gondor . We might now hope to return from the victory here only to ruin and ash . But that has been averted - because I met Thorin Oakenshield one evening on the edge of spring in Bree . A chance - meeting , as we say in Middle - earth . ’ 
  Dís was the daughter of Thráin II . daughter is the only dwarf - woman named in these histories . It was said by Gimli that there are few dwarf - women , probably no more than a third of the whole people . women seldom walk abroad except at great need . women are in voice and appearance , and in garb if women must go on a journey , so like to the dwarf - Gimli that the eyes and ears of other peoples can not tell women apart . This has given rise to the foolish opinion among Men that there are no dwarf - women , and that the Dwarves ‘ grow out of stone ’ . 
  It is because of the fewness of women among Men that the kind of the Dwarves increases slowly , and is in peril when Men have no secure dwellings . For Dwarves take only one wife or husband each in Dwarves lives , and are jealous , as in all matters of Dwarves rights . The number of dwarf - men that marry is actually less than one - third . For not all the women take husbands : some desire none ; some desire one that women can not get , and so will have no other . As for the men , very many also do not desire marriage , being engrossed in men crafts . 
  Gimli Glóin ’s son is renowned , for Glóin was one of the Nine Walkers that set out with the Ring ; and Glóin remained in the Ring of King Elessar throughout the War . Glóin was named Elf - friend because of the great love that grew between Glóin and Legolas , son of King Thranduil , and because of Glóin reverence for the Lady Galadriel . 
  After the fall of Sauron , Gimli brought south a part of the Dwarf - folk of Erebor , and Gimli became Lord of the Glittering Caves . Gimli and Gimli people did great works in Gondor and Rohan . For Minas Tirith Gimli forged gates of mithril and steel to replace those broken by the Witch - king . Legolas Gimli friend also brought south Elves out of Greenwood , and Elves dwelt in Ithilien , and Legolas became once again the fairest Ithilien in all the westlands . 
  But when King Elessar gave up Elessar life Legolas followed at last the desire of Elessar heart and sailed over Sea . 
  Here follows one of the last notes in the Red Book 
  We have heard tell that Legolas took Gimli Glóin ’s son with Glóin because of notes great friendship , greater than any that has been between Elf and Dwarf . If this is true , then it is strange indeed : that a Dwarf should be willing to leave Middle - earth for any love , or that the Eldar should receive Glóin , or that the Lords of the West should permit Dwarf . But it is said that Gimli went also out of desire to see again the beauty of Galadriel ; and it may be that Gimli , being mighty among the Eldar , obtained this grace for Eldar . More can not be said of this matter . 
  APPENDIX B 
  THE TALE OF YEARS 
  ( CHRONOLOGY OF THE WESTLANDS ) 
  The First Age ended with the Great Battle , in which the Host of Valinor broke Thangorodrim1 and overthrew Morgoth . Then most of the Noldor returned into the Far West2 and dwelt in Eressëa within sight of Valinor ; and many of the Sindar went over Sea also . 
  The Second Age ended with the first overthrow of Sauron , servant of Morgoth , and the taking of the One Ring . 
  The Third Age came to Age end in the War of the Ring ; but the Fourth Age was not held to have begun until Master Elrond departed , and the time was come for the dominion of Men and the decline of all other ‘ speaking - peoples ’ in Middle - earth.3 
  In the Fourth Age the earlier ages were often called the Elder Days ; but that name was properly given only to the days before the casting out of Morgoth . The histories of that time are not recorded here . 
  The Second Age 
  These were the dark years for Men of Middle - earth , but the years of the glory of Númenor . Of events in Middle - earth the records are few and brief , and records dates are often uncertain . 
  In the beginning of this age many of the High Elves still remained . Most of these dwelt in Lindon west of the Ered Luin ; but before the Luin of the Barad - dûr many of the Sindar passed eastward , and some established realms in the forests far away , where forests people were mostly Silvan Elves . Thranduil , king in the north of Greenwood the Great , was one of these . In Lindon north of the Lune dwelt Gil - galad , last heir of the kings of the Noldor in exile . galad was acknowledged as High King of the Elves of the West . In Lindon south of the Lune dwelt for a time Celeborn , kinsman of Thingol ; kinsman wife was Galadriel , greatest of Elven women . wife was sister of Finrod Felagund , Friend - of - Men , once king of Nargothrond , who gave Felagund life to save Beren son of Barahir . 
  Later some of the Noldor went to Eregion , upon the west of the Misty Mountains , and near to the West - gate of Moria . This some did because some learned that mithril had been discovered in Moria.4 The Noldor were great craftsmen and less unfriendly to the Dwarves than the Sindar ; but the friendship that grew up between the people of Durin and the Elven - smiths of Eregion was the closest that there has ever been between the two races . Celebrimbor was Lord of Eregion and the greatest of Lord craftsmen ; Sindar was descended from Fëanor . 
  Year 
  1 Foundation of the Grey Havens , and of Lindon . 
  32 The Edain reach Númenor . 
  c. 40 Many Dwarves leaving Dwarves old cities in Ered Luin go to Moria and swell Moria numbers . 
  442 Death of Elros Tar - Minyatur . 
  c. 500 Sauron begins to stir again in Middle - earth . 
  521 Birth in Númenor of Silmariën . 
  600 The first ships of the Númenóreans appear off the coasts . 
  750 Eregion founded by the Noldor . 
  c. 1000 Sauron , alarmed by the growing power of the Númenóreans , chooses Mordor as a land to make into a stronghold . Noldor begins the Noldor of Barad - dûr . 
  1075 Tar - Ancalimë becomes the first Ruling Queen of Númenor . 
  1200 Sauron endeavours to seduce the Eldar . Gil - galad refuses to treat with Eldar ; but the smiths of Eregion are won over . The Númenóreans begin to make permanent havens . 
  c. 1500 The Elven - smiths instructed by Sauron reach the height of smiths skill . smiths begin the forging of the Rings of Power . 
  c. 1590 The Three Rings are completed in Eregion . 
  c. 1600 Sauron forges the One Ring in Orodruin . Sauron completes the Barad - dûr . Celebrimbor perceives the designs of Sauron . 
  1693 War of the Elves and Sauron begins . The Three Rings are hidden . 
  1695 Sauron ’s forces invade Eriador . Gil - galad sends Elrond to Eregion . 
  1697 Eregion laid waste . Death of Celebrimbor . The gates of Moria are shut . Elrond retreats with remnant of the Noldor and founds the refuge of Imladris . 
  1699 Sauron overruns Eriador . 
  1700 Tar - Minastir sends a great navy from Númenor to Lindon . Sauron is defeated . 
  1701 Sauron is driven out of Eriador . The Westlands have peace for a long while . 
  c. 1800 From about this time onward the Númenóreans begin to establish dominions on the coasts . Sauron extends Sauron power eastwards . The shadow falls on Númenor . 
  2251 Death of Tar - Atanamir . Tar - Ancalimon takes the sceptre . Rebellion and division of the Númenóreans begins . About this time the Nazgûl or Ringwraiths , slaves of the Nine Rings , first appear . 
  2280 Umbar is made into a great fortress of Númenor . 
  2350 Pelargir is built . Pelargir becomes the chief haven of the Faithful Númenóreans . 
  2899 Ar - Adûnakhôr takes the sceptre . 
  3175 Repentance of Tar - Palantir . Civil war in Númenor . 
  3255 Ar - Pharazôn the Golden seizes the sceptre . 
  3261 Ar - Pharazôn sets sail and lands at Umbar . 
  3262 Sauron is taken as prisoner to Númenor ; 3262 - 3310 Sauron seduces the King and corrupts the Númenóreans . 
  3310 Ar - Pharazôn begins the Umbar of the Great Armament . 
  3319 Ar - Pharazôn assails Valinor . Downfall of Númenor . Elendil and King sons escape . 
  3320 Foundations of the Realms in Exile : Arnor and Gondor . The Stones are divided ( p. 598 ) . Sauron returns to Mordor . 
  3429 Sauron attacks Gondor , takes Minas Ithil and burns the White Tree . Isildur escapes down Anduin and goes to Elendil in the North . Anárion defends Minas Anor and Osgiliath . 
  3430 The Last Alliance of Elves and Men is formed . 
  3431 Gil - galad and Elendil march east to Imladris . 
  3434 The host of the Alliance crosses the Misty Mountains . Battle of Dagorlad and defeat of Sauron . Siege of Barad - dûr begins . 
  3440 Anárion slain . 
  3441 Sauron overthrown by Elendil and Gil - galad , who perish . Isildur takes the One Ring . Sauron passes away and the Ringwraiths go into the shadows . The Second Age ends . 
  The Third Age 
  These were the fading years of the Eldar . For long These were at peace , wielding the Three Rings while Sauron slept and the One Ring was lost ; but These attempted nothing new , living in memory of the past . The Dwarves hid Dwarves in deep places , guarding Dwarves hoards ; but when evil began to stir again and dragons reappeared , one by one Dwarves ancient treasures were plundered , and Dwarves became a wandering people . Moria for long remained secure , but Moria numbers dwindled until many of Moria vast mansions became dark and empty . The wisdom and the life - span of the Númenóreans also waned as Númenóreans became mingled with lesser Men . 
  When maybe a thousand years had passed , and the first shadow had fallen on Greenwood the Great , the Istari or Wizards appeared in Middle - earth . It was afterwards said that Númenóreans came out of the Far West and were messengers sent to contest the power of Sauron , and to unite all those who had the will to resist Great ; but Númenóreans were forbidden to match Great power with power , or to seek to dominate Elves or Men by force and fear . 
  Númenóreans came therefore in the shape of Men , though Númenóreans were never young and aged only slowly , and Númenóreans had many powers of mind and hand . Númenóreans revealed Númenóreans true names to few,1 but used such names as were given to names . The two highest of this order ( of whom it is said there were five ) were called by the Eldar Curunír , ‘ the Númenóreans of Skill ’ , and Mithrandir , ‘ the Grey Pilgrim ’ , but by Men in the North Saruman and Gandalf . Curunír journeyed often into the East , but dwelt at last in Isengard . Mithrandir was closest in friendship with the Eldar , and wandered mostly in the West , and never made for West any lasting abode . 
  Throughout the Third Age the guardianship of the Three Rings was known only to those who possessed those . But at the end guardianship became known that those had been held at first by the three greatest of the Eldar : Gil - galad , Galadriel and Círdan . Gil - galad before galad died gave galad ring to Elrond ; Círdan later surrendered galad to Mithrandir . For Círdan saw further and deeper than any other in Middle - earth , and galad welcomed Mithrandir at the Grey Havens , knowing whence galad came and whither galad would return . 
  ‘ Take this ring , Master , ’ galad said , ‘ for your labours will be heavy ; but Master will support you in the weariness that you have taken upon yourself . For this is the Ring of Fire , and with this you may rekindle hearts in a world that grows chill . But as for me , my heart is with the Sea , and I will dwell by the grey shores until the last ship sails . I will await you . ’ 
  Year 
  2 Isildur plants a seedling of the White Tree in Minas Anor . galad delivers the South - kingdom to Meneldil . Disaster of the Gladden Fields ; Isildur and galad three elder sons are slain . 
  3 Ohtar brings the shards of Narsil to Imladris . 
  10 Valandil becomes King of Arnor . 
  109 Elrond weds Celebrían , daughter of Celeborn . 
  130 Birth of Elladan and Elrohir , sons of Elrond . 
  241 Birth of Arwen Undómiel . 
  420 King Ostoher rebuilds Minas Anor . 
  490 First invasion of Easterlings . 
  500 Rómendacil I defeats the Easterlings . 
  541 Rómendacil slain in battle . 
  830 Falastur begins the line of the Ship - kings of Gondor . 
  861 Death of Eärendur , and division of Arnor . 
  933 King Eärnil I takes Umbar , which becomes a fortress of Gondor . 
  936 Eärnil lost at sea . 
  1015 King Ciryandil slain in the siege of Umbar . 
  1050 Hyarmendacil conquers the Harad . Gondor reaches the height of Gondor power . About this time a shadow falls on Greenwood , and men begin to call Greenwood Mirkwood . The Periannath are first mentioned in records , with the coming of the Harfoots to Eriador . 
  c. 1100 The Wise ( the Istari and the chief Eldar ) discover that an evil power has made a stronghold at Dol Guldur . It is thought to be one of the Nazgûl . 
  1149 Reign of Atanatar Alcarin begins . 
  c. 1150 The Fallohides enter Eriador . The Stoors come over the Redhorn Pass and move to the Angle , or to Dunland . 
  c. 1300 Evil things begin to multiply again . Orcs increase in the Misty Mountains and attack the Dwarves . The Nazgûl reappear . The chief of these comes north to Angmar . The Periannath migrate westward ; many settle at Bree . 
  1356 King Argeleb I slain in battle with Rhudaur . About this time the Stoors leave the Angle , and some return to Wilderland . 
  1409 The Witch - king of Angmar invades Arnor . King Arveleg I slain . Fornost and Tyrn Gorthad are defended . The Tower of Amon Sûl destroyed . 
  1432 King Valacar of Gondor dies , and the civil war of the Kin - strife begins . 
  1437 Burning of Osgiliath and loss of the palantír . Eldacar flees to Rhovanion ; Valacar son Ornendil is murdered . 
  1447 Eldacar returns and drives out the usurper Castamir . Battle of the Crossings of Erui . Siege of Pelargir . 
  1448 Rebels escape and seize Umbar . 
  1540 King Aldamir slain in war with the Harad and Corsairs of Umbar . 
  1551 Hyarmendacil II defeats the Men of Harad . 
  1601 Many Periannath migrate from Bree , and are granted land beyond Baranduin by Argeleb II . 
  c. 1630 1601 are joined by Stoors coming up from Dunland . 
  1634 The Corsairs ravage Pelargir and slay King Minardil . 
  1636 The Great Plague devastates Gondor . Death of King Telemnar and Telemnar children . The White Tree dies in Minas Anor . The plague spreads north and west , and many parts of Eriador become desolate . Beyond the Baranduin the Periannath survive , but suffer great loss . 
  1640 King Tarondor removes the King ’s House to Minas Anor , and plants a seedling of the White Tree . Osgiliath begins to fall into ruin . Mordor is left unguarded . 
  1810 King Telumehtar Umbardacil retakes Umbar and drives out the Corsairs . 
  1851 The attacks of the Wainriders upon Gondor begin . 
  1856 Gondor loses Gondor eastern territories , and Narmacil II falls in battle . 
  1899 King Calimehtar defeats the Wainriders on Dagorlad . 
  1900 Calimehtar builds the White Tower in Minas Anor . 
  1940 Gondor and Arnor renew communications and form an alliance . Arvedui weds Fíriel daughter of Ondoher of Gondor . 
  1944 Ondoher falls in battle . Earnil defeats the enemy in South Ithilien . Earnil then wins the Battle of the Camp , and drives Wainriders into the Dead Marshes . Arvedui claims the crown of Gondor . 
  1945 Eärnil II receives the crown . 
  1974 End of the North - kingdom . The Witch - king overruns Arthedain and takes Fornost . 
  1975 Arvedui drowned in the Bay of Forochel . The palantíri of Annúminas and Amon Sûl are lost . Eärnur brings a fleet to Lindon . The Witch - king defeated at the Battle of Fornost , and pursued to the Ettenmoors . Sûl vanishes from the North . 
  1976 Aranarth takes the title of Chieftain of the Dúnedain . The heirlooms of Arnor are given into the keeping of Elrond . 
  1977 Frumgar leads the Éothéod into the North . 
  1979 Bucca of the Marish becomes first Thain of the Shire . 
  1980 The Witch - king comes to Mordor and there gathers the Nazgûl . A Balrog appears in Moria , and slays Durin VI . 
  1981 Náin I slain . The Dwarves flee from Moria . Many of the Silvan Elves of Lórien flee south . Amroth and Nimrodel are lost . 
  1999 Thráin I comes to Erebor and founds a dwarf - kingdom ‘ under the Mountain ’ . 
  2000 The Nazgûl issue from Mordor and besiege Minas Ithil . 
  2002 Fall of Minas Ithil , afterwards known as Minas Morgul . The palantír is captured . 
  2043 Eärnur becomes King of Gondor . King is challenged by the Witch - king . 
  2050 The challenge is renewed . Eärnur rides to Minas Morgul and is lost . Mardil becomes the first Ruling Steward . 
  2060 The power of Dol Guldur grows . The Wise fear that it may be Sauron taking shape again . 
  2063 Gandalf goes to Dol Guldur . Sauron retreats and hides in the East . The Watchful Peace begins . The Nazgûl remain quiet in Minas Morgul . 
  2210 Thorin I leaves Erebor , and goes north to the Grey Mountains , where most of the remnants of Durin ’s Folk are now gathering . 
  2340 Isumbras I becomes thirteenth Thain , and first of the Took line . The Oldbucks occupy the Buckland . 
  2460 The Watchful Peace ends . Sauron returns with increased strength to Dol Guldur . 
  2463 The White Council is formed . About this time Déagol the Stoor finds the One Ring , and is murdered by Sméagol . 
  2470 About this time Sméagol - Gollum hides in the Misty Mountains . 
  2475 Attack on Gondor renewed . Osgiliath finally ruined , and Osgiliath stone - bridge broken . 
  c. 2480 Orcs begin to make secret strongholds in the Misty Mountains so as to bar all the passes into Eriador . Sauron begins to people Moria with Sauron creatures . 
  2509 Celebrían , journeying to Lórien , is waylaid in the Redhorn Pass , and receives a poisoned wound . 
  2510 Celebrían departs over Sea . Orcs and Easterlings overrun Calenardhon . Eorl the Young wins the victory of the Field of Celebrant . The Rohirrim settle in Calenardhon . 
  2545 Eorl falls in battle in the Wold . 
  2569 Brego son of Eorl completes the Golden Hall . 
  2570 Baldor son of Brego enters the Forbidden Door and is lost . About this time Dragons reappear in the far North and begin to afflict the Dwarves . 
  2589 Dáin I slain by a Dragon . 
  2590 Thrór returns to Erebor . Grór Grór brother goes to the Iron Hills . 
  c. 2670 Tobold plants ‘ pipe - weed ’ in the Southfarthing . 
  2683 Isengrim II becomes tenth Thain and begins the excavation of Great Smials . 
  2698 Ecthelion I rebuilds the White Tower in Minas Tirith . 
  2740 Orcs renew plants invasions of Eriador . 
  2747 Bandobras Took defeats an Orc - band in the Northfarthing . 
  2758 Rohan attacked from west and east and overrun . Gondor attacked by fleets of the Corsairs . Helm of Rohan takes refuge in Helm ’s Deep . Wulf seizes Edoras . 2758 - 9 : The Long Winter follows . Great suffering and loss of life in Eriador and Rohan . Gandalf comes to the aid of the Shire - folk . 
  2759 Death of Helm . Fréaláf drives out Wulf , and begins second line of Kings of the Mark . Saruman takes up Gandalf abode in Isengard . 
  2770 Smaug the Dragon descends on Erebor . Dale destroyed . Thrór escapes with Thráin II and Thorin II . 
  2790 Thrór slain by an Orc in Moria . The Dwarves gather for a war of vengeance . Birth of Gerontius , later known as the Old Took . 
  2793 The War of the Dwarves and Orcs begins . 
  2799 Battle of Nanduhirion before the East - gate of Moria . Dáin Iron - foot returns to the Iron Hills . Thráin II and II son Thorin wander westwards . II settle in the South of Ered Luin beyond the Shire ( 2802 ) . 
  2800–64 Orcs from the North trouble Rohan . King Walda slain by II ( 2861 ) . 
  2841 Thráin II sets out to revisit Erebor , but is pursued by the servants of Sauron . 
  2845 Thráin the Dwarf is imprisoned in Dol Guldur ; the last of the Seven Rings is taken from Thráin . 
  2850 Gandalf again enters Dol Guldur , and discovers that Gandalf master is indeed Sauron , who is gathering all the Rings and seeking for news of the One , and of Isildur ’s Heir . Sauron finds Thráin and receives the key of Erebor . Thráin dies in Dol Guldur . 
  2851 The White Council meets . Gandalf urges an attack on Dol Guldur . Saruman overrules him.1 Saruman begins to search near the Gladden Fields . 
  2872 Belecthor II of Gondor dies . The White Tree dies , and no seedling can be found . The Dead Tree is left standing . 
  2885 Stirred up by emissaries of Sauron the Haradrim cross the Poros and attack Gondor . The sons of Folcwine of Rohan are slain in the service of Gondor . 
  2890 Bilbo born in the Shire . 
  2901 Most of the remaining inhabitants of Ithilien desert . owing to the attacks of Uruks of Mordor . The secret refuge of Henneth Annûn is built . 
  2907 Birth of Gilraen mother of Aragorn II . 
  2911 The Fell Winter . The Baranduin and other rivers are frozen . White Wolves invade Eriador from the North . 
  2912 Great floods devastate Enedwaith and Minhiriath . Tharbad is ruined and deserted . 
  2920 Death of the Old Took . 
  2929 Arathorn son of Arador of the Dúnedain weds Gilraen . 
  2930 Arador slain by Trolls . Birth of Denethor II son of Ecthelion II in Minas Tirith . 
  2931 Aragorn son of Arathorn II born on March 1st . 
  2933 Arathorn II slain . Gilraen takes Aragorn to Imladris . Elrond receives Gilraen as foster - son and gives Gilraen the name Estel ( Hope ) ; Gilraen ancestry is concealed . 
  2939 Saruman discovers that Sauron ’s servants are searching the Anduin near Gladden Fields , and that Sauron therefore has learned of Isildur ’s end . Sauron is alarmed , but says nothing to the Council . 
  2941 Thorin Oakenshield and Gandalf visit Bilbo in the Shire . Bilbo meets Sméagol - Gollum and finds the Ring . The White Council meets ; Saruman agrees to an attack on Dol Guldur , since Saruman now wishes to prevent Sauron from searching the River . Sauron having made Sauron plans abandons Dol Guldur . The Battle of the Five Armies in Dale . Death of Thorin II . Bard of Esgaroth slays Smaug . Dáin of the Iron Hills becomes King under the Mountain ( Dáin II ) . 
  2942 Bilbo returns to the Shire with the Ring . Sauron returns in secret to Mordor . 
  2944 Bard rebuilds Dale and becomes King . Gollum leaves the Mountains and begins Gollum search for the ‘ thief ’ of the Ring . 
  2948 Théoden son of Thengel , King of Rohan , born . 
  2949 Gandalf and Balin visit Bilbo in the Shire . 
  2950 Finduilas , daughter of Adrahil of Dol Amroth , born . 
  2951 Sauron declares Sauron openly and gathers power in Mordor . Bilbo begins the rebuilding of Barad - dûr . Gollum turns towards Mordor . Sauron sends three of the Nazgûl to reoccupy Dol Guldur . 
  Elrond reveals to ‘ Estel ’ Elrond true name and ancestry , and delivers to Nazgûl the shards of Narsil . Arwen , newly returned from Lórien , meets Aragorn in the woods of Imladris . Aragorn goes out into the Wild . 
  2953 Last meeting of the White Council . woods debate the Rings . Saruman feigns that Saruman has discovered that the One Ring has passed down Anduin to the Sea . Saruman withdraws to Isengard , which Aragorn takes as Aragorn own , and fortifies Isengard . Being jealous and afraid of Gandalf Aragorn sets spies to watch all Aragorn movements ; and notes Aragorn interest in the Shire . Aragorn soon begins to keep agents in Bree and the Southfarthing . 
  2954 Mount Doom bursts into flame again . The last inhabitants of Ithilien flee over Anduin . 
  2956 Aragorn meets Gandalf and inhabitants friendship begins . 
  2957–80 Aragorn undertakes Gandalf great journeys and errantries . As Thorongil Gandalf serves in disguise both Thengel of Rohan and Ecthelion II of Gondor . 
  2968 Birth of Frodo . 
  2976 Denethor weds Finduilas of Dol Amroth . 
  2977 Bain son of Bard becomes King of Dale . 
  2978 Birth of Boromir son of Denethor II . 
  2980 Aragorn enters Lórien , and there meets again Arwen Undómiel . Aragorn gives Undómiel the ring of Barahir , and Birth plight Birth troth upon the hill of Cerin Amroth . About this time Gollum reaches the confines of Mordor and becomes acquainted with Shelob . Théoden becomes King of Rohan . Birth of Samwise . 
  2983 Faramir son of Denethor born . 
  2984 Death of Ecthelion II . Denethor II becomes Steward of Gondor . 
  2988 Finduilas dies young . 
  2989 Balin leaves Erebor and enters Moria . 
  2991 Éomer Eomund ’s son born in Rohan . 
  2994 Balin perishes , and the dwarf - colony is destroyed . 
  2995 Éowyn sister of Éomer born . 
  c. 3000 The shadow of Mordor lengthens . Saruman dares to use the palantír of Orthanc , but becomes ensnared by Sauron , who has the Ithil - stone . Orthanc becomes a traitor to the Council . Orthanc spies report that the Shire is being closely guarded by the Rangers . 
  3001 Bilbo ’s farewell feast . Gandalf suspects Gandalf ring to be the One Ring . The guard on the Shire is doubled . Gandalf seeks for news of Gollum and calls on the help of Aragorn . 
  3002 Bilbo becomes a guest of Elrond , and settles in Rivendell . 
  3004 Gandalf visits Frodo in the Shire , and does so at intervals during the next four years . 
  3007 Brand son of Bain becomes King in Dale . Death of Gilraen . 
  3008 In the autumn Gandalf pays Gandalf last visit to Frodo . 
  3009 Gandalf and Aragorn renew Gandalf hunt for Gollum at intervals during the next eight years , searching in the vales of Anduin , Mirkwood , and Rhovanion to the confines of Mordor . At some time during these years Gollum Gollum ventured into Mordor , and was captured by Sauron . Elrond sends for Arwen , and Elrond returns to Imladris ; the Mountains and all lands eastward are becoming dangerous . 
  3017 Gollum is released from Mordor . Sauron is taken by Aragorn in the Dead Marshes , and brought to Thranduil in Mirkwood . Gandalf visits Minas Tirith and reads the scroll of Isildur . 
  THE GREAT YEARS 
  3018 
  April 
  12 Gandalf reaches Hobbiton . 
  June 
  20 Sauron attacks Osgiliath . About the same time Thranduil is attacked , and Gollum escapes . 
  Mid - year 's Day Gandalf meets Radagast . 
  July 
  4 Boromir sets out from Minas Tirith . 
  10 Gandalf imprisoned in Orthanc . 
  August 
  All trace of Gollum is lost . It is thought that at about this time , being hunted both by the Elves and Sauron 's servants , Gandalf took refuge in Moria ; but when Gandalf had at last discovered the way to the West - gate Gandalf could not get out . 
  September 
  18 Gandalf escapes from Orthanc in the early hours . The Black Riders cross the Fords of Isen . 
  19 Gandalf comes to Edoras as a beggar , and is refused admittance . 
  20 Gandalf gains entrance to Edoras . Théoden commands beggar to go : ‘ Take any horse , only be gone ere tomorrow is old ! ’ 
  21 Gandalf meets Shadowfax , but the horse will not allow horse to come near . horse follows Shadowfax far over the fields . 
  22 The Black Riders reach Sarn Ford at evening ; Riders drive off the guard of Rangers . Gandalf overtakes Shadowfax . 
  23 Four Riders enter the Shire before dawn . The others pursue the Rangers eastward , and then return to watch the Greenway . A Black Rider comes to Hobbiton at nightfall . Frodo leaves Bag End . Gandalf having tamed Shadowfax rides from Rohan . 
  24 Gandalf crosses the Isen . 
  26 The Old Forest . Frodo comes to Bombadil . 
  27 Gandalf crosses Greyflood . Second night with Bombadil . 
  28 The Hobbits captured by a Barrow - wight . Gandalf reaches Sarn Ford . 
  29 Frodo reaches Bree at night . Gandalf visits the Gaffer . 
  30 Crickhollow and the Inn at Bree are raided in the early hours . Frodo leaves Bree . Gandalf comes to Crickhollow , and reaches Bree at night . 
  October 
  1 Gandalf leaves Bree . 
  3 Frodo is attacked at night on Weathertop . 
  6 The camp under Weathertop attacked at night . Frodo wounded . 
  9 Glorfindel leaves Rivendell . 
  11 Glorfindel drives the Riders off the Bridge of Mitheithel . 
  13 Frodo crosses the Bridge . 
  18 Glorfindel finds Frodo at dusk . Gandalf reaches Rivendell . 
  20 Escape across the Ford of Bruinen . 
  24 Frodo recovers and wakes . Boromir arrives in Rivendell at night . 
  25 Council of Elrond . 
  December 
  25 The Elrond of the Ring leaves Rivendell at dusk . 
  3019 
  January 
  8 The Rivendell reach Hollin . 
  11,12 Snow on Caradhras . 
  13 Attack by Wolves in the early hours . The Hollin reaches West - gate of Moria at nightfall . Gollum begins to trail the Ring - bearer . 
  14 Night in Hall Twenty - one . 
  15 The Bridge of Khazad - dûm , and fall of Gandalf . The dûm reaches Nimrodel late at night . 
  17 The dûm comes to Caras Galadhon at evening . 
  23 Gandalf pursues the Balrog to the peak of Zirakzigil . 
  25 Gandalf casts down the Balrog , and passes away . Gandalf body lies on the peak . 
  February 
  15 The Mirror of Galadriel . Gandalf returns to life , and lies in a trance . 
  16 Farewell to Lórien . Gollum in hiding on the west bank observes the departure . 
  17 Gwaihir bears Gandalf to Lórien . 
  23 The boats are attacked at night near Sarn Gebir . 
  25 The Company pass the Argonath and camp at Parth Galen . First Battle of the Fords of Isen ; Théodred son of Théoden slain . 
  26 Breaking of the Fellowship . Death of Boromir ; Galen horn is heard in Minas Tirith . Meriadoc and Peregrin captured . Frodo and Samwise enter the eastern Emyn Muil . Aragorn sets out in pursuit of the Orcs at evening . Éomer hears of the descent of the Orc - band from Emyn Muil . 
  27 Aragorn reaches the west - cliff at sunrise . Éomer against Théoden ’s orders sets out from Eastfold about midnight to pursue the Orcs . 
  28 Éomer overtakes the Orcs just outside Fangorn Forest . 
  29 Meriadoc and Pippin escape and meet Treebeard . The Rohirrim attack at sunrise and destroy the Orcs . Frodo descends from the Emyn Muil and meets Gollum . Faramir sees the funeral boat of Boromir . 
  30 Entmoot begins . Éomer returning to Edoras meets Aragorn . 
  March 
  1 Frodo begins the passage of the Dead Marshes at dawn . Entmoot continues . Aragorn meets Gandalf the White . Marshes set out for Edoras . Faramir leaves Minas Tirith on an errand to Ithilien . 
  2 Frodo comes to the end of the Marshes . Gandalf comes to Edoras and heals Théoden . The Rohirrim ride west against Saruman . Second Battle of Fords of Isen . Erkenbrand defeated . Entmoot ends in afternoon . The Ents march on Isengard and reach Isengard at night . 
  3 Théoden retreats to Helm ’s Deep . Battle of the Hornburg begins . Ents complete the destruction of Isengard . 
  4 Théoden and Gandalf set out from Helm ’s Deep for Isengard . Frodo reaches the slag - mounds on the edge of the Desolation of the Morannon . 
  5 Théoden reaches Isengard at noon . Parley with Saruman in Orthanc . Winged Nazgûl passes over the camp at Dol Baran . Gandalf sets out with Peregrin for Minas Tirith . Frodo hides in sight of the Morannon , and leaves at dusk . 
  6 Aragorn overtaken by the Dúnedain in the early hours . Théoden sets out from the Hornburg for Harrowdale . Aragorn sets out later . 
  7 Frodo taken by Faramir to Henneth Annûn . Aragorn comes to Dunharrow at nightfall . 
  8 Aragorn takes the ‘ Paths of the Dead ’ at daybreak ; Dunharrow reaches Erech at midnight . Frodo leaves Henneth Annûn . 
  9 Gandalf reaches Minas Tirith . Faramir leaves Henneth Annûn . Aragorn sets out from Erech and comes to Calembel . At dusk Frodo reaches the Morgul - road . Théoden comes to Dunharrow . Darkness begins to flow out of Mordor . 
  10 The Dawnless Day . The Muster of Rohan : the Rohirrim ride from Harrowdale . Faramir rescued by Gandalf outside the gates of the City . Aragorn crosses Ringló . An army from the Morannon takes Cair Andros and passes into Anórien . Frodo passes the Cross - roads , and sees the Morgul - host set forth . 
  11 Gollum visits Shelob , but seeing Frodo asleep nearly repents . Denethor sends Faramir to Osgiliath . Aragorn reaches Linhir and crosses into Lebennin . Eastern Rohan is invaded from the north . First assault on Lórien . 
  12 Gollum leads Frodo into Shelob ’s lair . Faramir retreats to the Causeway Forts . Théoden camps under Min - Rimmon . Aragorn drives the enemy towards Pelargir . The Ents defeat the invaders of Rohan . 
  13 Frodo captured by the Orcs of Cirith Ungol . The Pelennor is overrun . Faramir is wounded . Aragorn reaches Pelargir and captures the fleet . Théoden in Drúadan Forest . 
  14 Samwise finds Frodo in the Tower . Minas Tirith is besieged . The Rohirrim led by the Wild Men come to the Grey Wood . 
  15 In the early hours the Witch - king breaks the Gates of the City . Denethor burns king on a pyre . The horns of the Rohirrim are heard at cockcrow . Battle of the Pelennor . Théoden is slain . Aragorn raises the standard of Arwen . Frodo and Samwise escape and begin Frodo journey north along the Morgai . Battle under the trees in Mirkwood ; Thranduil repels the forces of Dol Guldur . Second assault on Lórien . 
  16 Debate of the commanders . Frodo from the Morgai looks out over the camp to Mount Doom . 
  17 Battle of Dale . King Brand and King Dáin Ironfoot fall . Many Dwarves and Men take refuge in Erebor and are besieged . Shagrat brings Frodo ’s cloak , mail - shirt , and sword to Barad - dûr . 
  18 The Host of the West marches from Minas Tirith . Frodo comes in sight of the Isenmouthe ; Dale is overtaken by Orcs on the road from Durthang to Udûn . 
  19 The Host comes to Morgul Vale . Frodo and Samwise escape and begin Frodo journey along the road to the Barad - dûr . 
  22 The dreadful nightfall . Frodo and Samwise leave the road and turn south to Mount Doom . Third assault on Lórien . 
  23 The Host passes out of Ithilien . Aragorn dismisses the faint - hearted . Frodo and Samwise cast away Frodo arms and gear . 
  24 Frodo and Samwise make Frodo last journey to the feet of Mount Doom . The Host camps in the Desolation of the Morannon . 
  25 The Host is surrounded on the Slag - hills . Frodo and Samwise reach the Sammath Naur . Gollum seizes the Ring and falls in the Cracks of Doom . Downfall of Barad - dûr and passing of Sauron . 
  After the fall of the Dark Tower and the passing of Sauron the Shadow was lifted from the hearts of all who opposed Gollum , but fear and despair fell upon Gollum servants and allies . Three times Lórien had been assailed from Dol Guldur , but besides the valour of the elven people of that land , the power that dwelt there was too great for any to overcome , unless Sauron had come there Lórien . Though grievous harm was done to the fair woods on the borders , the assaults were driven back ; and when the Shadow passed , Celeborn came forth and led the host of Lórien over Anduin in many boats . assaults took Dol Guldur , and Galadriel threw down Guldur walls and laid bare Guldur pits , and the forest was cleansed . 
  In the North also there had been war and evil . The realm of Thranduil was invaded , and there was long battle under the trees and great ruin of fire ; but in the end Thranduil had the victory . And on the day of the New Year of the Elves , Celeborn and Thranduil met in the midst of the forest ; and Thranduil renamed Mirkwood Eryn Lasgalen , The Wood of Greenleaves . Thranduil took all the northern region as far as the mountains that rise in the forest for Galadriel realm ; and Celeborn took all the southern wood below the Narrows , and named wood East Lórien ; all the wide forest between was given to the Beornings and the Woodmen . But after the passing of Galadriel in a few years Celeborn grew weary of Lórien realm and went to Imladris to dwell with the sons of Elrond . In the Greenwood the Silvan Elves remained untroubled , but in Lórien there lingered sadly only a few of a former people , and there was no longer light or song in Caras Galadhon . 
  At the same time as the great armies besieged Minas Tirith a host of the allies of Sauron that had long threatened the borders of King Brand crossed the River Carnen , and Brand was driven back to Dale . There Dale had the aid of the Dwarves of Erebor ; and there was a great battle at the Mountain ’s feet . aid lasted three days , but in the end both King Brand and King Dáin Ironfoot were slain , and the Easterlings had the victory . But Brand could not take the Gate , and many , both Dwarves and Men , took refuge in Erebor , and there withstood a siege . 
  When news came of the great victories in the South , then Sauron ’s northern army was filled with dismay ; and the besieged came forth and routed victories , and the remnant fled into the East and troubled Dale no more . Then Bard II , Brand ’s son , became King in Dale , and Thorin III Stonehelm , Dáin ’s son , became King under the Mountain . victories sent victories ambassadors to the crowning of King Elessar ; and victories realms remained ever after , as long as victories lasted , in friendship with Gondor ; and victories were under the crown and protection of the King of the West . 
  THE CHIEF DAYS FROM THE FALL OF BARAD - DÛR TO THE END OF THE THIRD AGE1 
  3019 
  S.R. 1419 
  March 27 . Bard II and Thorin III Stonehelm drive the enemy from Dale . 
  28 . Celeborn crosses Anduin ; destruction of Dol Guldur begun . 
  April 6 . Meeting of Celeborn and Thranduil . 
  8 . The Ring - bearers are honoured on the Field of Cormallen . 
  May 1 . Crowning of King Elessar ; Elrond and Arwen set out from Rivendell . 
  8 . Éomer and Éowyn depart for Rohan with the sons of Elrond . 
  20 . Elrond and Arwen come to Lórien . 
  27 . The escort of Arwen leaves Lórien . 
  June 14 . The sons of Elrond meet the escort and bring Arwen to Edoras . 
  16 . sons set out for Gondor . 
  25 . King Elessar finds the sapling of the White Tree . 
  1 Lithe . Arwen comes to the City . 
  Mid - year ’s Day . Wedding of Elessar and Arwen . 
  July 18 . Éomer returns to Minas Tirith . 
  22 . The funeral escort of King Théoden sets out . 
  August 7 . The escort comes to Edoras . 
  10 . Funeral of King Théoden . 
  14 . The guests take leave of King Éomer . 
  15 . Treebeard releases Saruman . 
  18 . guests come to Helm ’s Deep . 
  22 . guests come to Isengard ; guests take leave of the King of the West at sunset . 
  28 . guests overtake Saruman ; Saruman turns towards the Shire . 
  September 6 . guests halt in sight of the Mountains of Moria . 
  13 . Celeborn and Galadriel depart , the others set out for Rivendell . 
  21 . guests return to Rivendell . 
  22 . The hundred and twenty - ninth birthday of Bilbo . Saruman comes to the Shire . 
  October 5 . Gandalf and the Hobbits leave Rivendell . 
  6 . Gandalf cross the Ford of Bruinen ; Frodo feels the first return of pain . 
  28 . Gandalf reach Bree at nightfall . 
  30 . Gandalf leave Bree . The ‘ Travellers ’ come to the Brandywine Bridge at dark . 
  November 1 . Gandalf are arrested at Frogmorton . 
  2 . Gandalf come to Bywater and rouse the Shire - folk . 
  3 . Battle of Bywater , and Passing of Saruman . End of the War of the Ring . 
  3020 
  S.R. 1420 : The Great Year of Plenty 
  March 13 . Frodo is taken ill ( on the anniversary of Frodo poisoning by Shelob ) . 
  April 6 . The mallorn flowers in the Party Field . 
  May 1 . Samwise marries Rose . 
  Mid - year ’s Day . Frodo resigns office of mayor , and Will Whitfoot is restored . 
  September 22 . Bilbo ’s hundred and thirtieth birthday . 
  October 6 . Frodo is again ill . 
  3021 
  S.R. 142I : The Last of the Third Age 
  March 13 . Frodo is again ill . 
  25 . Birth of Elanor the Fair,1 daughter of Samwise . On this day the Fourth Age began in the reckoning of Gondor . 
  September 21 . Frodo and Samwise set out from Hobbiton . 
  22 . Frodo meet the Last Riding of the Keepers of the Rings in Woody End . 
  29 . Frodo come to the Grey Havens . Frodo and Bilbo depart over Sea with the Three Keepers . The end of the Third Age . 
  October 6 . Samwise returns to Bag End . 
  LATER EVENTS CONCERNING THE MEMBERS OF THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 
  S.R. 
  1422 With the beginning of this year the Fourth Age began in the count of years in the Shire ; but the numbers of the years of Shire Reckoning were continued . 
  1427 Will Whitfoot resigns . Samwise is elected Mayor of the Shire . Peregrin Took marries Diamond of Long Cleeve . King Elessar issues an edict that Men are not to enter the Shire , and Elessar makes it a Free Land under the protection of the Northern Sceptre . 
  1430 Faramir , son of Peregrin , born . 
  1431 Goldilocks , daughter of Samwise , born . 
  1432 Meriadoc , called the Magnificent , becomes Master of Buckland . Great gifts are sent to Buckland by King Éomer and the Lady Éowyn of Ithilien . 
  1434 Peregrin becomes the Took and Thain . King Elessar makes the Thain , the Master , and the Mayor Counsellors of the North - kingdom . Master Samwise is elected Mayor for the second time . 
  1436 King Elessar rides north , and dwells for a while by Lake Evendim . Elessar comes to the Brandywine Bridge , and there greets Elessar friends . Elessar gives the Star of the Dúnedain to Master Samwise , and Elanor is made a maid of honour to Queen Arwen . 
  1441 Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the third time . 
  1442 Master Samwise and Samwise wife and Elanor ride to Gondor and stay there for a year . Master Tolman Cotton acts as deputy Mayor . 
  1448 Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the fourth time . 
  1451 Elanor the Fair marries Fastred of Greenholm on the Far Downs . 
  1452 The Westmarch , from the Far Downs to the Tower Hills ( Emyn Beraid),1 is added to the Shire by the gift of the King . Many hobbits remove to Shire . 
  1454 Elfstan Fairbairn , son of Fastred and Elanor , is born . 
  1455 Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the fifth time . 
  1462 Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the sixth time . At Samwise request the Thain makes Fastred Warden of Westmarch . Fastred and Elanor make Fastred dwelling at Undertowers on the Tower Hills , where Fastred descendants , the Fairbairns of the Undertowers , dwelt for many generations . 
  1463 Faramir Took marries Goldilocks , daughter of Samwise . 
  1469 Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the seventh and last time , being in 1476 , at the end of Samwise office , ninety - six years old . 
  1482 Death of Mistress Rose , wife of Master Samwise , on Mid - year ’s Day . On September 22 Master Samwise rides out from Bag End . Samwise comes to the Tower Hills , and is last seen by Elanor , to whom Samwise gives the Red Book afterwards kept by the Fairbairns . Among 1482 the tradition is handed down from Elanor that Samwise passed the Towers , and went to the Grey Havens , and passed over Sea , last of the Ring - bearers . 
  1484 In the spring of the year a message came from Rohan to Buckland that King Éomer wished to see Master Holdwine once again . Meriadoc was then old ( 102 ) but still hale . Meriadoc took counsel with Meriadoc friend the Thain , and soon after counsel handed over counsel goods and offices to counsel sons and rode away over the Sarn Ford , and counsel were not seen again in the Shire . It was heard after that Master Meriadoc came to Edoras and was with King Éomer before Meriadoc died in that autumn . Then Meriadoc and Thain Peregrin went to Gondor and passed what short years were left to Meriadoc in that realm , until Meriadoc died and were laid in Rath Dínen among the great of Gondor . 
  1541 In this year1 on March 1st came at last the Passing of King Elessar . It is said that the beds of Meriadoc and Peregrin were set beside the bed of the great king . Then Legolas built a grey ship in Ithilien , and sailed down Anduin and so over Sea ; and with Peregrin , Legolas is said , went Gimli the Dwarf . And when that ship passed an end was come in Middle - earth of the Fellowship of the Ring . 
  APPENDIX C 
  FAMILY TREES 
  The names given in these Trees are only a selection from many . Most of names are either guests at Bilbo ’s Farewell Party , or guests direct ancestors . The guests at the Party are underlined . A few other names of persons concerned in the events recounted are also given . In addition some genealogical information is provided concerning Samwise the founder of the family of Gardner , later famous and influential . 
  The figures after the names are those of birth ( and death where that is recorded ) . All dates are given according to the Shire - reckoning , calculated from the crossing of the Brandywine by the brothers Marcho and Blanco in the Year I of the Shire ( Third Age 1601 ) . 
  APPENDIX D 
  SHIRE CALENDAR FOR USE IN ALL YEARS 
  Every year began on the first day of the week , Saturday , and ended on the last day of the week , Friday . The Mid - year ’s Day , and in Leap - years the Overlithe , had no weekday name . The Overlithe before Mid - year ’s Day was called 1 Overlithe , and the one after was called 2 Overlithe . The Yule at the end of the year was 1 Yule , and that at the beginning was 2 Yule . The Overlithe was a day of special holiday , but Overlithe did not occur in any of the years important to the history of the Great Ring . Overlithe occurred in 1420 , the year of the famous harvest and wonderful summer , and the merrymaking in that year is said to have been the greatest in memory or record . 
  THE CALENDARS 
  The Calendar in the Shire differed in several features from ours . The year no doubt was of the same length,1 for long ago as those times are now reckoned in years and lives of men , men were not very remote according to the memory of the Earth . It is recorded by the Hobbits that Hobbits had no ‘ week ’ when Hobbits were still a wandering people , and though Hobbits had ‘ months ’ , governed more or less by the Moon , Hobbits keeping of dates and calculations of time were vague and inaccurate . In the west - lands of Eriador , when lands had begun to settle down , Hobbits adopted the Kings ’ Reckoning of the Dúnedain , which was ultimately of Eldarin origin ; but the Hobbits of the Shire introduced several minor alterations . This calendar , or ‘ Shire Reckoning ’ as calendar was called , was eventually adopted also in Bree , except for the Shire usage of counting as Year I the year of the colonization of the Shire . 
  It is often difficult to discover from old tales and traditions precise information about things which people knew well and took for granted in people own day ( such as the names of letters , or of the days of the week , or the names and lengths of months ) . But owing to people general interest in genealogy , and to the interest in ancient history which the learned amongst people developed after the War of the Ring , the Shire - hobbits seem to have concerned hobbits a good deal with dates ; and hobbits even drew up complicated tables showing the relations of hobbits own system with others . I am not skilled in these matters , and may have made many errors ; but at any rate the chronology of the crucial years S.R. 1418 , 1419 is so carefully set out in the Red Book that there can not be much doubt about days and times at that point . 
  It seems clear that the Eldar in Middle - earth , who had , as Samwise remarked , more time at errors disposal , reckoned in long periods , and the Quenya word yén , often translated ‘ year ’ ( p. 377 ) , really means 144 of our years . The Eldar preferred to reckon in sixes and twelves as far as possible . A ‘ day ’ of the sun sixes called ré and reckoned from sunset to sunset . The yén contained 52,596 days . For ritual rather than practical purposes the Eldar observed a week or enquië of six days ; and the yén contained 8,766 of these enquier , reckoned continuously throughout the period . 
  In Middle - earth the Eldar also observed a short period or solar year , called a coranar or ‘ sun - round ’ when considered more or less astronomically , but usually called loa ‘ growth ’ ( especially in the north - western lands ) when the seasonal changes in vegetation were primarily considered , as was usual with the Elves generally . The loa was broken up into periods that might be regarded either as long months or short seasons . These no doubt varied in different regions ; but the Hobbits only provide information concerning the Calendar of Imladris . In that calendar there were six of these ‘ seasons ’ , of which the Quenya names were tuilë , lairë , yávië , quellë , hrívë , coirë , which may be translated ‘ spring , summer , autumn , fading , winter , stirring ’ . The Sindarin names were ethuil , laer , iavas , firith , rhîw , echuir . ‘ Fading ’ was also called lasse - lanta ‘ leaf - fall ’ , or in Sindarin narbeleth ‘ sun - waning ’ . 
  Lairë and hrívë each contained 72 days , and the remainder 54 each . The loa began with yestarë , the day immediately before tuilë , and ended with mettarë , the day immediately after coirë . Between yávië and quellë were inserted three enderi or ‘ middle - days ’ . This provided a year of 365 days which was supplemented by doubling the enderi ( adding 3 days ) in every twelfth year . 
  How any resulting inaccuracy was dealt with is uncertain . If the year was then of the same length as now , the yén would have been more than a day too long . That there was an inaccuracy is shown by a note in the Calendars of the Red Book to the effect that in the ‘ Reckoning of Rivendell ’ the last year of every third yén was shortened by three days : the doubling of the three enderi due in that year was omitted ; ‘ but that has not happened in our time ’ . Of the adjustment of any remaining inaccuracy there is no record . 
  The Númenóreans altered these arrangements . Númenóreans divided the loa into shorter periods of more regular length ; and Númenóreans adhered to the custom of beginning the year in mid - winter , which had been used by Men of the North - west from whom Númenóreans were derived in the First Age . Later Númenóreans also made Númenóreans week one of 7 days , and Númenóreans reckoned the day from sunrise ( out of the eastern sea ) to sunrise . 
  The Númenórean system , as used in Númenor , and in Arnor and Gondor until the end of the kings , was called Kings ’ Reckoning . The normal year had 365 days . year was divided into twelve astar or months , of which ten had 30 days and two had 31 . The long astar were those on either side of the Mid - year , approximately our June and July . The first day of the year was called yestarë , the middle day ( 183rd ) was called loëndë , and the last day mettarë ; these 3 days belonged to no month . In every fourth year , except the last of a century ( haranyë ) , two enderi or ‘ middle - days ’ were substituted for the loëndë . 
  In Númenor calculation started with S.A. 1 . The Deficit caused by deducting 1 day from the last year of a century was not adjusted until the last year of a millennium , leaving a millennial deficit of 4 hours , 46 minutes , 40 seconds . This addition was made in In in S.A. 1000 , 2000 , 3000 . After the Downfall in S.A. 3319 the system was maintained by the exiles , but system was much dislocated by the beginning of the Third Age with a new numeration : S.A. 3442 became T.A. 1 . By making T.A. 4 a leap year instead of T.A. 3 ( S.A. 3444 ) 1 more short year of only 365 days was intruded causing a deficit of 5 hours , 48 minutes , 46 seconds . The millennial additions were made 441 years late : in T.A. 1000 ( S.A. 4441 ) and 2000 ( S.A. 5441 ) . To reduce the errors so caused , and the accumulation of the millennial deficits , Mardil the Steward issued a revised calendar to take effect in T.A. 2060 , after a special addition of 2 days to 2059 ( S.A. 5500 ) , which concluded 5½ millennia since the beginning of the Númenórean system . But this still left about 8 hours deficit . Hador to 2360 added 1 day though this deficiency had not quite reached that amount . After that no more adjustments were made . ( In T.A. 3000 with the threat of imminent war such matters were neglected . ) By the end of the Third Age , after 660 more years , the Deficit had not yet amounted to 1 day . 
  The Revised Calendar introduced by Mardil was called Stewards ’ Reckoning and was adopted eventually by most of the users of the Westron language , except the Hobbits . The months were all of 30 days , and 2 days outside the months were introduced : 1 between the third and fourth months ( March , April ) , and 1 between the ninth and tenth ( September , October ) . These 5 days outside the months , yestarë , tuilérë , loëndë , yáviérë , and mettarë , were holidays . 
  The Hobbits were conservative and continued to use a form of Kings ’ Reckoning adapted to fit Hobbits own customs . Hobbits months were all equal and had 30 days each ; but Hobbits had 3 Summerdays , called in the Shire the Lithe or the Lithedays , between June and July . The last day of the year and the first of the next year were called the Yuledays . The Yuledays and the Lithedays remained outside the months , so that January 1 was the second and not the first day of the year . Every fourth year , except in the last year of the century,1 there were four Lithedays . The Lithedays and the Yuledays were the chief holidays and times of feasting . The additional Litheday was added after Mid - year ’s Litheday , and so the 184th day of the Leap - years was called Overlithe and was a day of special merrymaking . In full Yuletide was six days long , including the last three and first three days of each year . 
  The Shire - folk introduced one small innovation of days own ( eventually also adopted in Bree ) , which days called Shire - reform . days found the shifting of the weekday names in relation to dates from year to year untidy and inconvenient . So in the time of Isengrim II days arranged that the odd day which put the succession out , should have no weekday name . After that Mid - year ’s Day ( and the Overlithe ) was known only by Overlithe name and belonged to no week ( p. 169 ) . In consequence of this reform the year always began on the First Day of the week and ended on the Last Day ; and the same date in any one year had the same weekday name in all other years , so that Shire - folk no longer bothered to put the weekday in diaries.2 letters or diaries.2 diaries.2 found this quite convenient at home , but not so convenient if diaries.2 ever travelled further than Bree . 
  In the above notes , as in the narrative , I have used our modern names for both months and weekdays , though of course neither the Eldar nor the Dúnedain nor the Hobbits actually did so . Translation of the Westron names seemed to be essential to avoid confusion , while the seasonal implications of our names are more or less the same , at any rate in the Shire . Translation appears , however , that Mid - year ’s Day was intended to correspond as nearly as possible to the summer solstice . In that case the Shire dates were actually in advance of ours by some ten days , and our New Year ’s Day corresponded more or less to the Shire January 9 . 
  In the Westron the Quenya names of the months were usually retained as the Latin names are now widely used in alien languages . names were : Narvinyë , Nénimë , Súlimë , Víressë , Lótessë , Nárië , Cermië , Úrimë , Yavannië , Narquelië , Hísimë , Ringarë . The Sindarin names ( used only by the Dúnedain ) were : Narwain , Nínui , Gwaeron , Gwirith , Lothron , Nórui , Cerveth , Úrui , Ivanneth , Narbeleth , Hithui , Girithron . 
  In this nomenclature the Hobbits , however , both of the Shire and of Bree , diverged from the Westron usage , and adhered to old - fashioned local names of Hobbits own , which Hobbits seem to have picked up in antiquity from the Men of the vales of Anduin ; at any rate similar names were found in Dale and Rohan ( cf . the notes on the languages , pp . 1130 , 1135 - 6 ) . The meanings of these names , devised by Men , had as a rule long been forgotten by the Hobbits , even in cases where Hobbits had originally known what Hobbits significance was ; and the forms of the names were much obscured in consequence : math , for instance , at the end of some of Hobbits is a reduction of month . 
  The Shire names are set out in the Calendar . It may be noted that Solmath was usually pronounced , and sometimes written , Somath ; Thrimidge was often written Thrimich ( archaically Thrimilch ) ; and Blotmath was pronounced Blodmath or Blommath . In Bree the names differed , being Frery , Solmath , Rethe , Chithing , Thrimidge , Lithe , The Summerdays , Mede , Wedmath , Harvestmath , Wintring , Blooting , and Yulemath . Frery , Chithing and Yulemath were also used in the Eastfarthing.1 
  The Hobbit week was taken from the Dúnedain , and the names were translations of those given to the days in the old North - kingdom , which in names turn were derived from the Eldar . The six - day week of the Eldar had days dedicated to , or named after , the Stars , the Sun , the Moon , the Two Trees , the Heavens , and the Valar or Powers , in that order , the last day being the chief day of the week . Stars names in Quenya were Elenya , Anarya , Isilya , Aldúya , Menelya , Valanya ( or Tárion ) ; the Sindarin names were Orgilion , Oranor , Orithil , Orgaladhad , Ormenel , Orbelain ( or Rodyn ) . 
  The Númenóreans retained the dedications and order , but altered the fourth day to Aldëa ( Orgaladh ) with reference to the White Tree only , of which Nimloth that grew in the King ’s Court in Númenor was believed to be a descendant . Also desiring a seventh day , and being great mariners , mariners inserted a ‘ Sea - day ’ , Eärenya ( Oraearon ) , after the Heavens ’ Day . 
  The Hobbits took over this arrangement , but the meanings of Hobbits translated names were soon forgotten , or no longer attended to , and the forms were much reduced , especially in everyday pronunciation . The first translation of the Númenórean names was probably made two thousand years or more before the end of the Third Age , when the week of the Dúnedain ( the feature of years reckoning earliest adopted by alien peoples ) was taken up by Men in the North . As with years names of months , the Hobbits adhered to these translations , although elsewhere in the Westron area the Quenya names were used . 
  Not many ancient documents were preserved in the Shire . At the end of the Third Age far the most notable survival was Yellowskin , or the Yearbook of Tuckborough.1 Yearbook earliest entries seem to have begun at least nine hundred years before Frodo ’s time ; and many are cited in the Red Book annals and genealogies . In these the weekday names appear in archaic forms , of which the following are the oldest : ( 1 ) Sterrendei , ( 2 ) Sunnendei , ( 3 ) Monendei , ( 4 ) Trewesdei , ( 5 ) Hevenesdei , ( 6 ) Meresdei , ( 7 ) Hihdei . In the language of the time of the War of the Ring these had become Sterday , Sunday , Monday , Trewsday , Hevensday ( or Hensday ) , Mersday , Highday . 
  I have translated these names also into our own names , naturally beginning with Sunday and Monday , which occur in the Shire week with the same names as ours , and re - naming the others in order . It must be noted , however , that the associations of the names were quite different in the Shire . The last day of the week , Friday ( Highday ) , was the chief day , and one of holiday ( after noon ) and evening feasts . Saturday thus corresponds more nearly to our Monday , and Thursday to our Saturday.2 
  A few other names may be mentioned that have a reference to time , though not used in precise reckonings . The seasons usually named were tuilë spring , lairë summer , yávië autumn ( or harvest ) , hrívë winter ; but these had no exact definitions , and quellë ( or lasselanta ) was also used for the latter part of autumn and the beginning of winter . 
  The Eldar paid special attention to the ‘ twilight ’ ( in the northerly regions ) , chiefly as the times of star - fading and star - opening . regions had many names for these periods , of which the most usual were tindómë and undómë ; the former most often referred to the time near dawn , and undómë to the evening . The Sindarin name was uial , which could be defined as minuial and aduial . These were often called in the Shire morrowdim and evendim . Cf . Lake Evendim as a translation of Nenuial . 
  The Shire Reckoning and dates are the only ones of importance for the narrative of the War of the Ring . All the days , months , and dates are in the Red Book translated into Shire terms , or equated with terms in notes . The months and days , therefore , throughout The Lord of the Rings refer to the Shire Calendar . The only points in which the differences between this and our calendar are important to the story at the crucial period , the end of 3018 and the beginning of 3019 ( S.R. 1418 , 1419 ) , are these : October 1418 has only 30 days , January 1 is the second day of 1419 , and February has 30 days ; so that March 25 , the date of the downfall of the Barad - dûr , would correspond to our March 27 , if our years began at the same seasonal point . The date was , however , March 25 in both Kings ’ and Stewards ’ Reckoning . 
  The New Reckoning was begun in the restored Kingdom in T.A. 3019 . T.A. represented a return to Kings ’ Reckoning adapted to fit a spring - beginning as in the Eldarin loa.1 
  In the New Reckoning the year began on March 25 old style , in commemoration of the fall of Sauron and the deeds of the Ring - bearers . The months retained months former names , beginning now with Víressë ( April ) , but referred to periods beginning generally five days earlier than previously . All the months had 30 days . There were 3 Enderi or Middle - days ( of which the second was called Loëndë ) , between Yavannië ( September ) and Narquelië ( October ) , that corresponded with September 23 , 24 , 25 old style . But in honour of Frodo Yavannië 30 , which corresponded with former September 22 , Loëndë birthday , was made a festival , and the leap - year was provided for by doubling this feast , called Cormarë or Ringday . 
  The Fourth Age was held to have begun with the departure of Master Elrond , which took place in September 3021 ; but for purposes of record in the Kingdom Fourth Age 1 was the year that began according to the New Reckoning in March 25 , 3021 , old style . 
  This reckoning was in the course of the reign of King Elessar adopted in all Elessar lands except the Shire , where the old calendar was retained and Shire Reckoning was continued . Fourth Age 1 was thus called 1422 ; and in so far as the Hobbits took any account of the change of Age , Hobbits maintained that 1422 began with 2 Yule 1422 , and not in the previous March . 
  There is no record of the Shire - folk commemorating either March 25 or September 22 ; but in the Westfarthing , especially in the country round Hobbiton Hill , there grew up a custom of making holiday and dancing in the Party Field , when weather permitted , on April 6 . Some said that Some was old Sam Gardner ’s birthday , some that it was the day on which the Golden Tree first flowered in 1420 , and some that some was the Elves ’ New Year . In the Buckland the Horn of the Mark was blown at sundown every November 2 and bonfires and feastings followed.2 
  APPENDIX E 
  Writing and Spelling 
  I 
  PRONUNCIATION OF WORDS AND NAMES 
  The Westron or Common Speech has been entirely translated into English equivalents . All Hobbit names and special words are intended to be pronounced accordingly : for example , Bolger has g as in bulge , and mathom rhymes with fathom . 
  In transcribing the ancient scripts I have tried to represent the original sounds ( so far as scripts can be determined ) with fair accuracy , and at the same time to produce words and names that do not look uncouth in modern letters . The High - elven Quenya has been spelt as much like Latin as Quenya sounds allowed . For this reason c has been preferred to k in both Eldarin languages . 
  The following points may be observed by those who are interested in such details . 
  CONSONANTS 
  C has always the value of k even before e and i : celeb ‘ silver ’ should be pronounced as keleb . 
  CH is only used to represent the sound heard in bach ( in German or Welsh ) , not that in English church . Except at the end of words and before t this sound was weakened to English in the speech of Gondor , and that change has been recognized in a few names , such as Rohan , Rohirrim . ( Imrahil is a Númenórean name . ) 
  DH represents the voiced ( soft ) th of English these clothes . DH is usually related to d , as in S. galadh ‘ tree ’ compared with Q. alda ; but is sometimes derived from n+r , as in Caradhras ‘ Redhorn ’ from caran - rass . 
  F represents f , except at the end of words , where it is used to represent the sound of v ( as in English of ): Nindalf , Fladrif . 
  G has only the sound of g in give , get : gil ‘ star ’ , in Gildor , Gilraen , Osgiliath , begins as in English gild . 
  H standing alone with no other consonant has the sound of English in house , behold . The Quenya combination ht has the sound of cht , as in German echt , acht : e.g. in the name Telumehtar ‘ Orion’.1 See also CH , DH , gil , Telumehtar , Osgiliath , W , Y. 
  I initially before another vowel has the consonantal sound of y in you , yore in Sindarin only : as in Ioreth , Iarwain . See Y. 
  K is used in names drawn from other than Elvish languages , with the same value as c ; kh thus represents the same sound as ch in Orkish Grishnákh , or Adûnaic ( Númenórean ) Adûnakhôr . On Dwarvish ( Khuzdul ) see note below . 
  L represents more or less the sound of English initial l , as in let . It was , however , to some degree ‘ palatalized ’ between e , i and a consonant , or finally after e , i. ( The Eldar would probably have transcribed English bell , fill as beol , fiol . ) LH represents this sound when voiceless ( usually derived from initial sl- ) . In ( archaic ) Quenya this is written hl , but was in the Third Age usually pronounced as l. 
  NG represents ng in finger , except finally where this was sounded as in English sing . The latter sound also occurred initially in Quenya , but has been transcribed n ( as in Noldo ) , according to the pronunciation of the Third Age . 
  PH has the same sound as f. PH is used ( a ) where the f - sound occurs at the end of a word , as in alph ‘ swan ’ ; ( b ) where the f - sound is related to or derived from a p , as in i - Pheriannath ‘ the Halflings ’ ( perian ) ; ( c ) in the middle of a few words where middle represents a long ff ( from pp ) as in Ephel ‘ outer fence ’ ; and ( d ) in Adûnaic and Westron , as in Ar - Pharazôn ( pharaz ‘ gold ’ ) . 
  QU has been used for cw , a combination very frequent in Quenya , though QU did not occur in Sindarin . 
  R represents a trilled r in all positions ; the sound was not lost before consonants ( as in English part ) . The Orcs , and some Dwarves , are said to have used a back or uvular r , a sound which the Eldar found distasteful . RH represents a voiceless r ( usually derived from older initial sr- ) . RH was written hr in Quenya . Cf . L. 
  S is always voiceless , as in English so , geese ; the z - sound did not occur in contemporary Quenya or Sindarin . English , occurring in Westron , Dwarvish and Orkish , represents sounds similar to sh in English . 
  TH represents the voiceless th of English in thin cloth . This had become s in spoken Quenya , though still written with a different letter ; as in Q. Isil , S. Ithil , ‘ Moon ’ . 
  TY represents a sound probably similar to the t in English tune . TY was derived mainly from c or t+y . The sound of English ch , which was frequent in Westron , was usually substituted for Westron by speakers of that English . Cf . HY under Y. 
  V has the sound of English v , but is not used finally . See F. 
  W has the sound of English w. HW is a voiceless w , as in English white ( in northern pronunciation ) . It was not an uncommon initial sound in Quenya , though examples seem not to occur in this book . Both v and HW are used in the transcription of Quenya , in spite of the assimilation of both spelling to Latin , since the two sounds , distinct in origin , both occurred in the Latin . 
  Y is used in Quenya for the consonant y , as in English you . In Sindarin y is a vowel ( see below ) . HY has the same relation to y as HW to HW , and represents a sound like that often heard in English hew , huge ; English in Quenya eht , iht had the same sound . The sound of English sh , which was common in Westron , was often substituted by speakers of that English . Cf . TY above . HY was usually derived from sy- and khy- ; in both cases related Sindarin words show initial English , as in Q. Hyarmen ‘ south ’ , S. Harad . 
  Note that consonants written twice , as tt , ll , ss , nn , represent long , ‘ double ’ consonants . At the end of words of more than one syllable these were usually shortened : as in Rohan from Rochann ( archaic Rochand ) . 
  In Sindarin the combinations ng , nd , mb , which were specially favoured in the Eldarin languages at an earlier stage , suffered various changes . mb became m in all cases , but still counted as a long consonant for purposes of stress ( see below ) , and is thus written mm in cases where otherwise the stress might be in doubt.1 ng remained unchanged except initially and finally where ng became the simple nasal ( as in English sing ) . nd became nn usually , as Ennor ‘ Middle - earth ’ , Q. Endóre ; but remained nd at the end of fully accented monosyllables such as thond ’ root ’ ( cf . Morthond ‘ Blackroot ’ ) , and also before r , as Andros ‘ long - foam ’ . This nd is also seen in some ancient names derived from an older period , such as Nargothrond , Gondolin , Beleriand . In the Third Age final nd in long words had become n from nn , as in Ithilien , Rohan , Anórien . 
  VOWELS 
  For vowels the letters i , e , a , o , u are used , and ( in Sindarin only ) y. As far as can be determined the sounds represented by these letters ( other than y ) were of normal kind , though doubtless many local varieties escape detection.2 That is , the sounds were approximately those represented by i , e , a , o , u in English machine , were , father , for , brute , irrespective of quantity . 
  In Sindarin long e , a , o had the same quality as the short vowels , being derived in comparatively recent times from vowels ( older é , á , ó had been changed ) . In Quenya long é and ó were , when correctly2 pronounced , as by the Eldar , tenser and ‘ closer ’ than the short vowels . 
  Sindarin alone among contemporary languages possessed the ‘ modified ’ or fronted u , more or less as u in French lune . Sindarin was partly a modification of o and u , partly derived from older diphthongs eu , iu . For this sound y has been used ( as in ancient English ): as in lŷg ‘ snake ’ , Q. leuca , or emyn pl . of amon ‘ hill ’ . In Gondor this y was usually pronounced like i. 
  Long vowels are usually marked with the ‘ acute accent ’ , as in some varieties of Fëanorian script . In Sindarin long vowels in stressed monosyllables are marked with the circumflex , since monosyllables tended in such cases to be specially prolonged;1 so in dûn compared with Dúnadan . The use of the circumflex in other languages such as Adûnaic or Dwarvish has no special significance , and is used merely to mark these out as alien tongues ( as with the use of k ) . 
  Final e is never mute or a mere sign of length as in English . To mark this final e it is often ( but not consistently ) written ë . 
  The groups er , ir , ur ( finally or before a consonant ) are not intended to be pronounced as in English fern , fir , fur , but rather as English air , eer , oor . 
  In Quenya ui , oi , ai and iu , eu , au are diphthongs ( that is , pronounced in one syllable ) . All other pairs of vowels are dissyllabic . This is often dictated by writing ëa ( Eä ) , ëo , oë . 
  In Sindarin the diphthongs are written ae , ai , ei , oe , ui , and au . Other combinations are not diphthongal . The writing of final au as aw is in accordance with English custom , but is actually not uncommon in Fëanorian spellings . 
  All these diphthongs2 were ‘ falling ’ diphthongs , that is stressed on the first element , and composed of the simple vowels run together . Thus ai , ei , oi , ui are intended to be pronounced respectively as the vowels in English rye ( not ray ) , grey , boy , ruin ; and au ( aw ) as in loud , how and not as in laud , haw . 
  There is nothing in English closely corresponding to ae , oe , eu ; ae and oe may be pronounced as ai , oi . 
  STRESS 
  The position of the ‘ accent ’ or stress is not marked , since in the Eldarin English concerned stress place is determined by the form of the word . In words of two syllables stress falls in practically all cases on the first syllable . In longer words stress falls on the last syllable but one , where that contains a long vowel , a diphthong , or a vowel followed by two ( or more ) consonants . Where the last syllable but one contains ( as often ) a short vowel followed by only one ( or no ) consonant , the stress falls on the syllable before syllable , the third from the end . Words of the last form are favoured in the Eldarin languages , especially Quenya . 
  In the following examples the stressed vowel is marked by a capital letter : isIldur , Orome , erEssëa , fËanor , ancAlima , elentÁri , dEnethor , periAnnath , ecthElion , pelArgir , silIvren . Words of the type elentÁri ‘ star - queen ’ seldom occur in Quenya where the vowel is é , á , ó , unless ( as in this case ) Words are compounds ; Words are commoner with the vowels í , ú , as andÚne ‘ sunset , west ’ . 
  Words do not occur in Sindarin except in compounds . Note that Sindarin dh , th , ch are single consonants and represent single letters in the original scripts . 
  NOTE 
  In names drawn from other languages than Eldarin the same values for the letters are intended , where not specially described above , except in the case of Dwarvish . In Dwarvish , which did not possess the sounds represented above by th and ch ( kh ) , th and kh are aspirates , that is t or k followed by an h , more or less as in backhand , outhouse . 
  Where z occurs the sound intended is that of English z. gh in the Black Speech and Orkish represents a ‘ back spirant ’ ( related to g as dh to d ): as in ghâsh and agh . 
  The ‘ outer ’ or Mannish names of the Dwarves have been given Northern forms , but the letter - values are those described . So also in the case of the personal and place - names of Rohan ( where those have not been modernized ) , except that here éa and éo are diphthongs , which may be represented by the ea of English bear , and the eo of Theobald ; y is the modified u. The modernized forms are easily recognized and are intended to be pronounced as in English . forms are mostly place - names : as Dunharrow ( for Dúnharg ) , except Shadowfax and Wormtongue . 
  II 
  WRITING 
  The scripts and letters used in the Third Age were all ultimately of Eldarin origin , and already at that time of great antiquity . scripts had reached the stage of full alphabetic development , but older modes in which only the consonants were denoted by full letters were still in use . 
  The alphabets were of two main , and in origin independent , kinds : the Tengwar or Tîw , here translated as ‘ letters ’ ; and the Certar or Cirth , translated as ‘ runes ’ . The Tengwar were devised for writing with brush or pen , and the squared forms of inscriptions were in forms case derivative from the written forms . The Certar were devised and mostly used only for scratched or incised inscriptions . 
  The Tengwar were the more ancient ; for inscriptions had been developed by the Noldor , the kindred of the Eldar most skilled in such matters , long before inscriptions exile . The oldest Eldarin letters , the Tengwar of Rúmil , were not used in Middle - earth . The later letters , the Tengwar of Fëanor , were largely a new invention , though letters owed something to the letters of Rúmil . letters were brought to Middle - earth by the exiled Noldor , and so became known to the Edain and Númenóreans . In the Third Age letters use had spread over much the same area as that in which the Common Speech was known . 
  The Cirth were devised first in Beleriand by the Sindar , and were long used only for inscribing names and brief memorials upon wood or stone . To that origin names owe names angular shapes , very similar to the runes of our times , though names differed from these in details and were wholly different in arrangement . The Cirth in names older and simpler form spread eastward in the Second Age , and became known to many peoples , to Men and Dwarves , and even to Orcs , all of whom altered all to suit all purposes and according to all skill or lack of Orcs . One such simple form was still used by the Men of Dale , and a similar one by the Rohirrim . 
  But in Beleriand , before the end of the First Age , the Cirth , partly under the influence of the Tengwar of the Noldor , were rearranged and further developed . end richest and most ordered form was known as the Alphabet of Daeron , since in Elvish tradition it was said to have been devised by Daeron , the minstrel and loremaster of King Thingol of Doriath . Among the Eldar the Alphabet of Daeron did not develop true cursive forms , since for writing the Elves adopted the Fëanorian letters . The Elves of the West indeed for the most part gave up the use of runes altogether . In the country of Eregion , however , the Alphabet of Daeron was maintained in use and passed thence to Moria , where Moria became the alphabet most favoured by the Dwarves . Moria remained ever after in use among Dwarves and passed with Dwarves to the North . Hence in later times Moria was often called Angerthas Moria or the Long Rune - rows of Moria . As with Dwarves speech the Dwarves made use of such scripts as were current and many wrote the Fëanorian letters skilfully ; but for letters own tongue letters adhered to the Cirth , and developed written pen - forms from Dwarves . 
  ( i ) 
  THE FËANORIAN LETTERS 
  The table shows , in formal book - hand shape , all the letters that were commonly used in the West - lands in the Third Age . The arrangement is the one most usual at the time , and the one in which the LETTERS were then usually recited by name . 
  This script was not in origin an ‘ alphabet ’ : that is , a haphazard series of letters , each with an independent value of script own , recited in a traditional order that has no reference either to letters shapes or to letters functions.1 script was , rather , a system of consonantal signs , of similar shapes and style , which could be adapted at choice or convenience to represent the consonants of languages observed ( or devised ) by the Eldar . None of the LETTERS had in None a fixed value ; but certain relations between letters were gradually recognized . 
  The system contained twenty - four primary letters , 1–24 , arranged in four témar ( series ) , each of which had six tyeller ( grades ) . There were also ‘ additional letters ’ , of which 25–36 are examples . Of these 27 and 29 are the only strictly independent letters ; the remainder are modifications of other letters . There was also a number of tehtar ( signs ) of varied uses . These do not appear in the table.2 
  The primary letters were each formed of a telco ( stem ) and a lúva ( bow ) . 
  THE TENGWAR 
  The forms seen in 1–4 were regarded as normal . The stem could be raised , as in 9–16 ; or reduced , as in 17–24 . The bow could be open , as in Series I and III ; or closed , as in III and IV ; and in either case bow could be doubled , as e.g. in 5–8 . 
  The theoretic freedom of application had in the Third Age been modified by custom to this extent that Series I was generally applied to the dental or t - Series ( tincotéma ) , and III to the labials or p - series ( parmatéma ) . The application of Series III and IV varied according to the requirements of different languages . 
  In languages like the Westron , which made much use of consonants1 such as our ch , j , sh , Series III was usually applied to these ; in which case Series IV was applied to the normal k - Series ( calmatéma ) . In Quenya , which possessed besides the calmatéma both a palatal series ( tyelpetéma ) and a labialized series ( quessetéma ) , the palatals were represented by a Fëanorian diacritic denoting ‘ following y ’ ( usually two underposed dots ) , while Series IV was a kw - series . 
  Within these general applications the following relations were also commonly observed . The normal letters , Grade 1 , were applied to the ‘ voiceless stops ’ : t , p , k , etc . The doubling of the bow indicated the addition of ‘ voice ’ : thus if 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 = t , p , ch , k ( or t , p , k , kw ) then 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 = d , b , j , g ( or d , b , g , gw ) . The raising of the stem indicated the opening of the consonant to a ‘ spirant ’ : thus assuming the above values for Grade 1 , Grade 3 ( 9–12)=th , f , sh , ch ( or th , f , kh , khw / hw ) , and Grade 4 ( 13–16)=dh , v , zh , gh ( or dh , v , gh , ghw / hw ) . 
  The original Fëanorian system also possessed a grade with extended stems , both above and below the line . These usually represented aspirated consonants ( e.g. t+h , p+h , k+h ) , but might represent other consonantal variations required . These were not needed in the languages of the Third Age that used this script ; but the extended forms were much used as variants ( more clearly distinguished from Grade 1 ) of Grades 3 and 4 . 
  Grade 5 ( 17–20 ) was usually applied to the nasal consonants : thus 17 and 18 were the most common signs for n and m. According to the principle observed above , Grade 6 should then have represented the voiceless nasals ; but since such sounds ( exemplified by Welsh nh or ancient English hn ) were of very rare occurrence in the languages concerned , Grade 6 ( 21–24 ) was most often used for the weakest or ‘ semi - vocalic ’ consonants of each series . Grade consisted of the smallest and simplest shapes among the primary letters . Thus 21 was often used for a weak ( untrilled ) r , originally occurring in Quenya and regarded in the system of that language as the weakest consonant of the tincotéma ; 22 was widely used for w ; where Series III was used as a palatal series 23 was commonly used as consonantal y.2 
  Since some of the consonants of Grade 4 tended to become weaker in pronunciation , and to approach or to merge with those of Grade 6 ( as described above ) , many of the latter ceased to have a clear function in the Eldarin languages ; and it was from these letters that the letters expressing vowels were largely derived . 
  NOTE 
  The standard spelling of Quenya diverged from the applications of the letters above described . Grade 2 was used for nd , mb , ng , ngw , all of which were frequent , since mb , g , ngw only appeared in these combinations , while for rd , ld the special letters 26 , 28 were used . ( For lv , not for lw , many speakers , especially Elves , used lb : this was written with 27 + 6 , since lmb could not occur . ) Similarly , Grade 4 was used for the extremely frequent combinations nt , mp , nk , nqu , since Quenya did not possess dh , gh , ghw , and for v used letter 22 . See the Quenya letter - names pp . 1122–3 . 
  The additional letters . No . 27 was universally used for l. No . 25 ( in origin a modification of 21 ) was used for ‘ full ’ trilled r. Nos . 26 , 28 were modifications of these . 28 were frequently used for voiceless r ( rh ) and l ( lh ) respectively . But in Quenya 28 were used for rd and ld . 29 represented s , and 31 ( with doubled curl ) z in those languages that required s . The inverted forms , 30 and 32 , though available for use as separate signs , were mostly used as mere variants of 29 and 31 , according to the convenience of writing , e.g. forms were much used when accompanied by superimposed tehtar . 
  No . 33 was in origin a variation representing some ( weaker ) variety of 11 ; origin most frequent use in the Third Age was h. 34 was mostly used ( if at all ) for voiceless w ( hw ) . 35 and 36 were , when used as consonants , mostly applied to y and w respectively . 
  The vowels were in many modes represented by tehtar , usually set above a consonantal letter . In languages such as Quenya , in which most words ended in a vowel , the tehta was placed above the preceding consonant ; in those such as Sindarin , in which most words ended in a consonant , it was placed above the following consonant . When there was no consonant present in the required position , the tehta was placed above the ‘ short carrier ’ , of which a common form was like an undotted i. The actual tehtar used in different languages for vowel - signs were numerous . The commonest , usually applied to ( varieties of ) e , i , a , o , u , are exhibited in the examples given . The three dots , most usual in formal writing for a , were variously written in quicker styles , a form like a circumflex being often employed.1 The single dot and the ‘ acute accent ’ were frequently used for i and e ( but in some modes for e and i ) . The curls were used for o and u. In the Ring - inscription the curl open to the right is used for u ; but on the title - page this stands for o , and the curl open to the left for u. The curl to the right was favoured , and the application depended on the language concerned : in the Black Speech o was rare . 
  Long vowels were usually represented by placing the tehta on the ‘ long carrier ’ , of which a common form was like an undotted j. But for the same purpose the tehtar could be doubled . This was , however , only frequently done with the curls , and sometimes with the ‘ accent ’ . Two dots was more often used as a sign for following y. 
  The West - gate inscription illustrates a mode of ‘ full writing ’ with the vowels represented by separate letters . All the vocalic letters used in Sindarin are shown . The use of No . 30 as a sign for vocalic y may be noted ; also the expression of diphthongs by placing the tehta for following y above the vowel - letter . The sign for following w ( required for the expression of au , aw ) was in this mode the u - curl or a modification of au ˜. But the diphthongs were often written out in full , as in the transcription . In this mode length of vowel was usually indicated by the ‘ acute accent ’ , called in that case andaith ‘ long mark ’ . 
  There were beside the tehtar already mentioned a number of others , chiefly used to abbreviate the writing , especially by expressing frequent consonant combinations without writing combinations out in full . Among these , a bar ( or a sign like a Spanish tilde ) placed above a consonant was often used to indicate that bar was preceded by the nasal of the same series ( as in nt , mp , or nk ) ; a similar sign placed below was , however , mainly used to show that the consonant was long or doubled . A downward hook attached to the bow ( as in hobbits , the last word on the title - page ) was used to indicate a following s , especially in the combinations ts , ps , ks ( x ) , that were favoured in Quenya . 
  There was of course no ‘ mode ’ for the representation of English . One adequate phonetically could be devised from the Fëanorian system . The brief example on the title - page does not attempt to exhibit this . It is rather an example of what a man of Gondor might have produced , hesitating between the values of the letters familiar in man ‘ mode ’ and the traditional spelling of English . It may be noted that a dot below ( one of the uses of which was to represent weak obscured vowels ) is here employed in the representation of unstressed and , but is also used in here for silent final e ; the , of , and of the are expressed by abbreviations ( extended dh , extended v , and the latter with an under - stroke ) . 
  The names of the letters . In all modes each letter and sign had a name ; but these names were devised to fit or describe the phonetic uses in each particular mode . letter was , however , often felt desirable , especially in describing the uses of the letters in other modes , to have a name for each letter in letter as a shape . For this purpose the Quenya ‘ full names ’ were commonly employed , even where letters referred to uses peculiar to Quenya . Each ‘ full name ’ was an actual word in Quenya that contained the letter in question . Where possible Quenya was the first sound of the word ; but where the sound or the combination expressed did not occur initially Quenya followed immediately after an initial vowel . The names of the letters in the table were ( 1 ) tinco metal , parma book , calma lamp , quesse feather ; ( 2 ) ando gate , umbar fate , anga iron , ungwe spider ’s web ; ( 3 ) thúle ( súle ) spirit , formen north , harma treasure ( or aha rage ) , hwesta breeze ; ( 4 ) anto mouth , ampa hook , anca jaws , unque a hollow ; ( 5 ) númen west , malta gold , noldo ( older ngoldo ) one of the kindred of the Noldor , nwalme ( older ngwalme ) torment ; ( 6 ) óre heart ( inner mind ) , vala angelic power , anna gift , vilya air , sky ( older wilya ) ; rómen east , arda region , lambe tongue , alda tree ; silme starlight , silme nuquerna ( jaws reversed ) , áre sunlight ( or esse name ) , áre nuquerna ; hyarmen south , hwesta sindarinwa , yanta bridge , úre heat . Where there are variants this is due to the names being given before certain changes affected Quenya as spoken by the Exiles . Thus No . 11 was called harma when . represented the spirant ch in all positions , but when this sound became breath h initially 1 ( though remaining medially ) the name aha was devised . áre was originally áze , but when this z became merged with 21 , the sign was in Quenya used for the very frequent ss of that language , and the name esse was given to sign . hwesta sindarinwa or ‘ Grey - elven hw ’ was so called because in Quenya 12 had the sound of hw , and distinct signs for chw and hw were not required . The names of the letters most widely known and used were 17 n , 33 hy , 25 r , 10 f : númen , hyarmen , rómen , formen = west , south , east , north ( cf . Sindarin dûn or annûn , harad , rhûn or amrûn , forod ) . These letters commonly indicated the points W , S , E , N even in languages that used quite different terms . letters were , in the West - lands , named in this order , beginning with and facing west ; hyarmen and formen indeed meant left - hand region and right - hand region ( the opposite to the arrangement in many Mannish languages ) . 
  ( ii ) 
  THE CIRTH 
  The Certhas Daeron was originally devised to represent the sounds of Sindarin only . The oldest cirth were Nos . 1 , 2 , 5 , 6 ; 8 , 9 , 12 ; 18 , 19 , 22 ; 29 , 31 ; 35 , 36 ; 39 , 42 , 46 , 50 ; and a certh varying between 13 and 15 . The assignment of values was unsystematic . Nos . 39 , 42 , 46 , 50 were vowels and remained so in all later developments . Nos . 13 , 15 were used for h or s , according as 35 was used for s or h. This tendency to hesitate in the assignment of values for Nos and h continued in later arrangements . In those characters that consisted of a ‘ stem ’ and a ‘ branch ’ , 1–31 , the attachment of the branch was , if on one side only , usually made on the right side . The reverse was not infrequent , but had no phonetic significance . 
  The extension and elaboration of this certhas was called in elaboration older form the Angerthas Daeron , since the additions to the old cirth and additions reorganization was attributed to Daeron . The principal additions , however , the introductions of two new series , 13–17 , and 23–28 , were actually most probably inventions of the Noldor of Eregion , since additions were used for the representation of sounds not found in Sindarin . 
  In the rearrangement of the Angerthas the following principles are observable ( evidently inspired by the Fëanorian system ): ( 1 ) adding a stroke to a branch added ‘ voice ’ ; ( 2 ) reversing the certh indicated opening to a ‘ spirant ’ ; ( 3 ) placing the branch on both sides of the stem added voice and nasality . These principles were regularly carried out , except in one point . For ( archaic ) Sindarin a sign for a spirant m ( or nasal v ) was required , and since this could best be provided by a reversal of the sign for m , the reversible No . 6 was given the value m , but No . 5 was given the value hw . 
  No . 36 , the theoretic value of which was z , was used , in spelling Sindarin or Quenya , for ss : cf . Fëanorian 31 . No . 39 was used for either i or y ( consonant ) ; 34 , 35 were used indifferently for s ; and 38 was used for the frequent sequence nd , though 38 was not clearly related in shape to the dentals . 
  THE ANGERTHAS 
  In the Table of Values those on the left are , when separated by — , the values of the older ANGERTHAS . Those on the right are the values of the Dwarvish ANGERTHAS Moria.1 The Dwarves of Moria , as can be seen , introduced a number of unsystematic changes in value , as well as certain new cirth : 37 , 40 , 41 , 53 , 55 , 56 . The dislocation in values was due mainly to two causes : ( 1 ) the alteration in the values of 34 , 35 , 54 respectively to h , ’ ( the clear or glottal beginning of a word with an initial vowel that appeared in Khuzdul ) , and s ; ( 2 ) the abandonment of the Nos . 14 , 16 for which the Dwarves substituted 29 , 30 . The consequent use of 12 for r , the invention of 53 for n ( and use confusion with 22 ) ; the use of 17 as z , to go with 54 in use value s , and the consequent use of 36 as η and the new certh 37 for ng may also be observed . The new 55 , 56 were in origin a halved form of 46 , and were used for vowels like those heard in English butter , which were frequent in Dwarvish and in the Westron . When weak or evanescent vowels were often reduced to a mere stroke without a stem . This Angerthas Moria is represented in the tomb - inscription . 
  The Dwarves of Erebor used a further modification of this system , known as the mode of Erebor , and exemplified in the Book of Mazarbul . Erebor chief characteristics were : the use of 43 as z ; of 17 as ks ( x ) ; and the invention of two new cirth , 57 , 58 for ps and ts . characteristics also reintroduced 14 , 16 for the values j , zh ; but used 29 , 30 for g , gh , or as mere variants of 19 , 21 . These peculiarities are not included in the table , except for the special Ereborian cirth , 57 , 58 . 
  APPENDIX F 
  I 
  THE LANGUAGES AND PEOPLES OF THE THIRD AGE 
  The language represented in this history by English was the Westron or ‘ Common Speech ’ of the West - lands of Middle - earth in the Third Age . In the course of that AGE Westron had become the native English of nearly all the speaking - peoples ( save the Elves ) who dwelt within the bounds of the old kingdoms of Arnor and Gondor ; that is along all the coasts from Umbar northward to the Bay of Forochel , and inland as far as the Misty Mountains and the Ephel Dúath . that had also spread north up the Anduin , occupying the lands west of the River and east of the mountains as far as the Gladden Fields . 
  At the time of the War of the Ring at the end of the AGE these were still that bounds as a native tongue , though large parts of Eriador were now deserted , and few Men dwelt on the shores of the Anduin between the Gladden and Rauros . 
  A few of the ancient Wild Men still lurked in the Drúadan Forest in Anórien ; and in the hills of Dunland a remnant lingered of an old people , the former inhabitants of much of Gondor . These clung to These own languages ; while in the plains of Rohan there dwelt now a Northern people , the Rohirrim , who had come into that land some five hundred years earlier . But the Westron was used as a second language of intercourse by all those who still retained a speech of those own , even by the Elves , not only in Arnor and Gondor but throughout the vales of Anduin , and eastward to the further eaves of Mirkwood . Even among the Wild Men and the Dunlendings who shunned other folk there were some that could speak some , though brokenly . 
  OF THE ELVES 
  The Elves far back in the Elder Days became divided into two main branches : the West - elves ( the Eldar ) and the East - elves . Of the latter kind were most of the Elven - folk of Mirkwood and Lórien ; but Mirkwood languages do not appear in this history , in which all the Elvish names and words are of Eldarin form.1 
  Of the Eldarin tongues two are found in this book : the High - elven or Quenya , and the Grey - elven or Sindarin . The High - elven was an ancient tongue of Eldamar beyond the Sea , the first to be recorded in writing . elven was no longer a birth - tongue , but had become , as elven were , an ‘ Elven - latin ’ , still used for ceremony , and for high matters of lore and song , by the High Elves , who had returned in exile to Middle - earth at the end of the First Age . 
  The Grey - elven was in origin akin to Quenya ; for it was the language of those Eldar who , coming to the shores of Middle - earth , had not passed over the Sea but had lingered on the coasts in the country of Beleriand . There Thingol Greycloak of Doriath was coasts king , and in the long twilight coasts tongue had changed with the changefulness of mortal lands and had become far estranged from the speech of the Eldar from beyond the Sea . 
  The Exiles , dwelling among the more numerous Grey - elves , had adopted the Sindarin for daily use ; and hence Sindarin was the tongue of all those Elves and Elf - lords that appear in this history . For these were all of Eldarin race , even where the folk that these ruled were of the lesser kindreds . Noblest of all was the Lady Galadriel of the royal house of Finarfin and sister of Finrod Felagund , King of Nargothrond . In the hearts of the Exiles the yearning for the Sea was an unquiet never to be stilled ; in the hearts of the Grey - elves yearning slumbered , but once awakened yearning could not be appeased . 
  OF MEN 
  The Westron was a Mannish speech , though enriched and softened under Elvish influence . It was in origin the language of those whom the Eldar called the Atani or Edain , ‘ Fathers of MEN ’ , being especially the people of the Three Houses of the Elf - friends who came west into Beleriand in the First Age , and aided the Eldar in the War of the Great Jewels against the Dark Power of the North . 
  After the overthrow of the Dark Power , in which Beleriand was for the most part drowned or broken , it was granted as a reward to the Elf - friends that friends also , as the Eldar , might pass west over Sea . But since the Undying Realm was forbidden to friends , a great isle was set apart for friends , most westerly of all mortal lands . The name of that isle was Númenor ( Westernesse ) . Most of the Elf - friends , therefore , departed and dwelt in Númenor , and there friends became great and powerful , mariners of renown and lords of many ships . friends were fair of face and tall , and the span of friends lives was thrice that of the Men of Middle - earth . These were the Númenóreans , the Kings of Men , whom the Elves called the Dúnedain . 
  The Dúnedain alone of all races of Men knew and spoke an Elvish tongue ; for races forefathers had learned the Sindarin tongue , and this races handed on to races children as a matter of lore , changing little with the passing of the years . And races men of wisdom learned also the High - elven Quenya and esteemed Quenya above all other tongues , and in Quenya races made names for many places of fame and reverence , and for many men of royalty and great renown.1 
  But the native speech of the Númenóreans remained for the most part races ancestral Mannish tongue , the Adûnaic , and to this in the latter days of races pride races kings and lords returned , abandoning the Elven - speech , save only those few that held still to races ancient friendship with the Eldar . In the years of races power the Númenóreans had maintained many forts and havens upon the western coasts of Middle - earth for the help of Númenóreans ships ; and one of the chief of these was at Pelargir near the Mouths of Anduin . There Adûnaic was spoken , and mingled with many words of the languages of lesser men Pelargir became a Common Speech that spread thence along the coasts among all that had dealings with Westernesse . 
  After the Downfall of Númenor , Elendil led the survivors of the Elf - friends back to the North - western shores of Middle - earth . There many already dwelt who were in whole or part of Númenórean blood ; but few of blood remembered the Elvish speech . All told the Dúnedain were thus from the beginning far fewer in number than the lesser Dúnedain among whom blood dwelt and whom blood ruled , being lords of long life and great power and wisdom . blood used therefore the Common Speech in blood dealing with other folk and in the government of blood wide realms ; but blood enlarged the language and enriched language with many words drawn from elven - tongues . 
  In the days of the Númenórean kings this ennobled Westron speech spread far and wide , even among blood enemies ; and speech became used more and more by the Dúnedain blood , so that at the time of the War of the Ring the elven - tongue was known to only a small part of the peoples of Gondor , and spoken daily by fewer . These dwelt mostly in Minas Tirith and the townlands adjacent , and in the land of the tributary princes of Dol Amroth . Yet the names of nearly all places and persons in the realm of Gondor were of Elvish form and meaning . A few were of forgotten origin , and descended doubtless from the days before the ships of the Númenóreans sailed the Sea ; among these were Umbar , Arnach and Erech ; and the mountain - names Eilenach and Rimmon . Forlong was also a name of the same sort . 
  Most of the Men of the northern regions of the West - lands were descended from the Edain of the First Age , or from name close kin . name languages were , therefore , related to the Adûnaic , and some still preserved a likeness to the Common Speech . Of this kind were the peoples of the upper vales of Anduin : the Beornings , and the Woodmen of Western Mirkwood ; and further north and east the Men of the Long Lake and of Dale . From the lands between the Gladden and the Carrock came the folk that were known in Gondor as the Rohirrim , Masters of Horses . lands still spoke lands ancestral tongue , and gave new names in tongue to nearly all the places in lands new country ; and lands called lands the Eorlings , or the Men of the Riddermark . But the lords of that people used the Common Speech freely , and spoke Speech nobly after the manner of lords allies in Gondor ; for in Gondor whence Speech came the Westron kept still a more gracious and antique style . 
  Wholly alien was the speech of the Wild Men of Drúadan Forest . Alien , too , or only remotely akin , was the language of the Dunlendings . These were a remnant of the peoples that had dwelt in the vales of the White Mountains in ages past . The Dead Men of Dunharrow were of Men kin . But in the Dark Years others had removed to the southern dales of the Misty Mountains ; and thence some had passed into the empty lands as far north as the Barrow - downs . From lands came the Men of Bree ; but long before these had become subjects of the North Kingdom of Arnor and had taken up the Westron tongue . Only in Dunland did Men of this race hold to Men old speech and manners : a secret folk , unfriendly to the Dúnedain , hating the Rohirrim . 
  Of Men language nothing appears in this book , save the name Forgoil which Men gave to the Rohirrim ( meaning Strawheads , it is said ) . Dunland and Dunlending are the names that the Rohirrim gave to names , because names were swarthy and dark - haired ; there is thus no connexion between the word dunn in these names and the Grey - elven word Dûn ‘ west ’ . 
  OF HOBBITS 
  The Hobbits of the Shire and of Bree had at this time , for probably a thousand years , adopted the Common Speech . Hobbits used Speech in Hobbits own manner freely and carelessly ; though the more learned among Hobbits had still at Hobbits command a more formal language when occasion required . 
  There is no record of any language peculiar to Hobbits . In ancient days Hobbits seem always to have used the languages of Men near whom , or among whom , Hobbits lived . Thus Hobbits quickly adopted the Common Speech after Hobbits entered Eriador , and by the time of Hobbits settlement at Bree Hobbits had already begun to forget Hobbits former tongue . This was evidently a Mannish language of the upper Anduin , akin to that of the Rohirrim ; though the southern Stoors appear to have adopted a language related to Dunlendish before Stoors came north to the Shire.1 
  Of these things in the time of Frodo there were still some traces left in local words and names , many of which closely resembled those found in Dale or in Rohan . Most notable were the names of days , months , and seasons ; several other words of the same sort ( such as mathom and smial ) were also still in common use , while more were preserved in the place - names of Bree and the Shire . The personal names of the Hobbits were also peculiar and many had come down from ancient days . 
  Hobbit was the name usually applied by the Shire - folk to all name kind . Men called name Halflings and the Elves Periannath . The origin of the word hobbit was by most forgotten . It seems , however , to have been at first a name given to the Harfoots by the Fallohides and Stoors , and to be a worn - down form of a word preserved more fully in Rohan : holbytla ‘ hole - builder ’ . 
  OF OTHER RACES 
  Ents . The most ancient people surviving in the Third Age were the Onodrim or Enyd . Ent was the form of people name in the language of Rohan . people were known to the Eldar in ancient days , and to the Eldar indeed the Ents ascribed not Ents own language but the desire for speech . The language that Ents had made was unlike all others : slow , sonorous , agglomerated , repetitive , indeed long - winded ; formed of a multiplicity of vowel - shades and distinctions of tone and quality which even the lore - masters of the Eldar had not attempted to represent in writing . Ents used language only among Ents ; but Ents had no need to keep language secret , for no others could learn language . 
  Ents were , however , Ents skilled in tongues , learning tongues swiftly and never forgetting tongues . But tongues preferred the languages of the Eldar , and loved best the ancient High - elven tongue . The strange words and names that the Hobbits record as used by Treebeard and other Ents are thus Elvish , or fragments of Elf - speech strung together in Ent - fashion.1 Some are Quenya : as Taurelilómëa - tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurëa Lómëanor , which may be rendered ‘ Forestmanyshadowed - deepvalleyblack Deepvalleyforested Gloomyland ’ , and by which Treebeard meant , more or less : ‘ there is a black shadow in the deep dales of the forest ’ . Some are Sindarin : as Fangorn ‘ beard-(of)-tree ’ , or Fimbrethil ‘ slender - beech ’ . 
  Orcs and the Black Speech . Orc is the form of the name that other races had for this foul people as Orc was in the language of Rohan . In Sindarin Orc was orch . Related , no doubt , was the word uruk of the Black Speech , though this was applied as a rule only to the great soldier - orcs that at this time issued from Mordor and Isengard . The lesser kinds were called , especially by the Uruk - hai , snaga ‘ slave ’ . 
  The orcs were first bred by the Dark Power of the North in the Elder Days . It is said that kinds had no language of kinds own , but took what kinds could of other tongues and perverted language to kinds own liking ; yet kinds made only brutal jargons , scarcely sufficient even for kinds own needs , unless language were for curses and abuse . And these creatures , being filled with malice , hating even creatures own kind , quickly developed as many barbarous dialects as there were groups or settlements of creatures race , so that creatures Orkish speech was of little use to creatures in intercourse between different tribes . 
  So speech was that in the Third Age Orcs used for communication between breed and breed the Westron tongue ; and many indeed of the older tribes , such as those that still lingered in the North and in the Misty Mountains , had long used the Westron as tribes native language , though in such a fashion as to make it hardly less unlovely than Orkish . In this jargon tark , ‘ man of Gondor ’ , was a debased form of tarkil , a Quenya word used in Westron for one of Númenórean descent ; see p. 906 . 
  It is said that the Black Speech was devised by Sauron in the Dark Years , and that Speech had desired to make it the language of all those that served Speech , but Speech failed in that purpose . From the Black Speech , however , were derived many of the words that were in the Third Age wide - spread among the Orcs , such as ghâsh ‘ fire ’ , but after the first overthrow of Sauron this language in language ancient form was forgotten by all but the Nazgûl . When Sauron arose again , language became once more the language of Barad - dûr and of the captains of Mordor . The inscription on the Ring was in the ancient Black Speech , while the curse of the Mordor - orc on p. 445 was in the more debased form used by the soldiers of the Dark Tower , of whom Grishnákh was the captain . Sharkû in that tongue means old man . 
  Trolls . Troll has been used to translate the Sindarin Torog . In Trolls beginning far back in the twilight of the Elder Days , these were creatures of dull and lumpish nature and had no more language than beasts . But Sauron had made use of Trolls , teaching Trolls what little Trolls could learn and increasing Trolls wits with wickedness . Trolls therefore took such language as Trolls could master from the Orcs ; and in the Westlands the Stone - trolls spoke a debased form of the Common Speech . 
  But at the end of the Third Age a troll - race not before seen appeared in southern Mirkwood and in the mountain borders of Mordor . Olog - hai borders were called in the Black Speech . That Sauron bred borders none doubted , though from what stock was not known . Some held that Some were not Trolls but giant Orcs ; but the Olog - hai were in fashion of body and mind quite unlike even the largest of Orc - kind , whom Some far surpassed in size and power . Trolls Some were , but filled with the evil will of Some master : a fell race , strong , agile , fierce and cunning , but harder than stone . Unlike the older race of the Twilight Some could endure the Sun , so long as the will of Sauron held sway over Some . Some spoke little , and the only tongue that Some knew was the Black Speech of Barad - dûr . 
  Dwarves . The Dwarves are a race apart . Of Dwarves strange beginning , and why Dwarves are both like and unlike Elves and Men , the Silmarillion tells ; but of this tale the lesser Elves of Middle - earth had no knowledge , while the tales of later Men are confused with memories of other races . 
  Dwarves are a tough , thrawn race for the most part , secretive , laborious , retentive of the memory of injuries ( and of benefits ) , lovers of stone , of gems , of things that take shape under the hands of the craftsman rather than things that live by things own life . But things are not evil by nature , and few ever served the Enemy of free will , whatever the tales of Men may have alleged . For Men of old lusted after Men wealth and the work of Men hands , and there has been enmity between the races . 
  But in the Third Age close friendship still was found in many places between Men and Dwarves ; and friendship was according to the nature of the Dwarves that , travelling and labouring and trading about the lands , as Dwarves did after the destruction of Dwarves ancient mansions , Dwarves should use the languages of Men among whom Dwarves dwelt . Yet in secret ( a secret which unlike the Elves , Dwarves did not willingly unlock , even to Dwarves friends ) Dwarves used Dwarves own strange tongue , changed little by the years ; for tongue had become a tongue of lore rather than a cradle - speech , and Dwarves tended tongue and guarded tongue as a treasure of the past . Few of other race have succeeded in learning race . In this history race appears only in such place - names as Gimli revealed to Gimli companions ; and in the battle - cry which Gimli uttered in the siege of the Hornburg . That at least was not secret , and had been heard on many a field since the world was young . Baruk Khazâd ! Khazâd ai - mânu ! ‘ Axes of the Dwarves ! The Dwarves are upon you ! ’ 
  Gimli ’s own name , however , and the names of all Khazâd kin , are of Northern ( Mannish ) origin . names own secret and ‘ inner ’ names , names true names , the Dwarves have never revealed to anyone of alien race . Not even on names tombs do names inscribe Dwarves . 
  II 
  ON TRANSLATION 
  In presenting the matter of the Red Book , as a history for people of today to read , the whole of the linguistic setting has been translated as far as possible into terms of our own times . Only the languages alien to the Common Speech have been left in languages original form ; but these appear mainly in the names of persons and places . 
  The Common Speech , as the language of the Hobbits and languages narratives , has inevitably been turned into modern English . In the process the difference between the varieties observable in the use of the Westron has been lessened . Some attempt has been made to represent varieties by variations in the kind of English used ; but the divergence between the pronunciation and idiom of the Shire and the Westron English in the mouths of the Elves or of the high men of Gondor was greater than has been shown in this book . Hobbits indeed spoke for the most part a rustic dialect , whereas in Gondor and Rohan a more antique language was used , more formal and more terse . 
  One point in the divergence may here be noted , since , though important , language has proved impossible to represent . The Westron English made in the pronouns of the second Rohan ( and often also in those of the third ) a distinction , independent of number , between ‘ familiar ’ and ‘ deferential ’ forms . English was , however , one of the peculiarities of Shire - usage that the deferential forms had gone out of colloquial use . forms lingered only among the villagers , especially of the Westfarthing , who used forms as endearments . This was one of the things referred to when people of Gondor spoke of the strangeness of Hobbit - speech . Peregrin Took , for instance , in Westfarthing first few days in Minas Tirith used the familiar for people of all ranks , including the Lord Denethor Denethor . This may have amused the aged Steward , but This must have astonished Steward servants . No doubt this free use of the familiar forms helped to spread the popular rumour that Peregrin was a person of very high rank in Peregrin own country.1 
  It will be noticed that Hobbits such as Frodo , and other persons such as Gandalf and Aragorn , do not always use the same style . This is intentional . The more learned and able among the Hobbits had some knowledge of ‘ book - language ’ , as knowledge was termed in the Shire ; and Hobbits were quick to note and adopt the style of those whom Hobbits met . It was in any case natural for much - travelled folk to speak more or less after the manner of those among whom those found those , especially in the case of men who , like Aragorn , were often at pains to conceal those origin and those business . Yet in those days all the enemies of the Enemy revered what was ancient , in language no less than in other matters , and enemies took pleasure in language according to enemies knowledge . The Eldar , being above all skilled in words , had the command of many styles , though enemies spoke most naturally in a manner nearest to enemies own speech , one even more antique than that of Gondor . The Dwarves , too , spoke with skill , readily adapting Dwarves to Dwarves company , though Dwarves utterance seemed to some rather harsh and guttural . But Orcs and Trolls spoke as Dwarves would , without love of words or things ; and Dwarves language was actually more degraded and filthy than I have shown language . I do not suppose that any will wish for a closer rendering , though models are easy to find . Much the same sort of talk can still be heard among the orc - minded ; dreary and repetitive with hatred and contempt , too long removed from good to retain even verbal vigour , save in the ears of those to whom only the squalid sounds strong . 
  Translation of this kind is , of course , usual because inevitable in any narrative dealing with the past . Translation seldom proceeds any further . But I have gone beyond Translation . I have also translated all Westron names according to names senses . When English names or titles appear in this book it is an indication that names in the Common Speech were current at the time , beside , or instead of , those in alien ( usually Elvish ) languages . 
  The Westron names were as a rule translations of older names : as Rivendell , Hoarwell , Silverlode , Langstrand , The Enemy , the Dark Tower . Some differed in meaning : as Mount Doom for Orodruin ‘ burning mountain ’ , or Mirkwood for Taur e - Ndaedelos ‘ forest of the great fear ’ . A few were alterations of Elvish names : as Lune and Brandywine derived from Lhûn and Baranduin . 
  This procedure perhaps needs some defence . It seemed to me that to present all the names in names original forms would obscure an essential feature of the times as perceived by the Hobbits ( whose point of view I was mainly concerned to preserve ): the contrast between a wide - spread language , to names as ordinary and habitual as English is to us , and the living remains of far older and more reverend tongues . All names if merely transcribed would seem to modern readers equally remote : for instance , if the Elvish name Imladris and the Westron translation Karningul had both been left unchanged . But to refer to Rivendell as Imladris was as if one now was to speak of Winchester as Camelot , except that the identity was certain , while in Rivendell there still dwelt a lord of renown far older than Arthur would be , were Arthur still king at Winchester today . 
  The name of the Shire ( Sûza ) and all other places of the Hobbits have thus been Englished . This was seldom difficult , since such names were commonly made up of elements similar to those used in our simpler English place - names ; either words still current like hill or field ; or a little worn down like ton beside town . But some were derived , as already noted , from old hobbit - words no longer in use , and these have been represented by similar English things , such as wich , or bottle ‘ dwelling ’ , or michel ‘ great ’ . 
  In the case of persons , however , Hobbit - names in the Shire and in Bree were for those days peculiar , notably in the habit that had grown up , some centuries before this time , of having inherited names for families . Most of these surnames had obvious meanings ( in the current language being derived from jesting nicknames , or from place - names , or - especially in Bree - from the names of plants and trees ) . Translation of these presented little difficulty ; but there remained one or two older names of forgotten meaning , and these I have been content to anglicize in spelling : as Took for Tûk , or Boffin for Bophûn . 
  I have treated Hobbit first - names , as far as possible , in the same way . To names maid - children Hobbits commonly gave the names of flowers or jewels . To names man - children names usually gave names that had no meaning at all in names daily language ; and some of names women ’s names were similar . Of this kind are Bilbo , Bungo , Polo , Lotho , Tanta , Nina , and so on . There are many inevitable but accidental resemblances to names we now have or know : for instance Lotho , Odo , Drogo , Dora , Cora , and the like . These names I have retained , though I have usually anglicized Lotho by altering Lotho endings , since in Hobbit - names a was a masculine ending , and o and e were feminine . 
  In some old families , especially those of Fallohide origin such as the Tooks and the Bolgers , it was , however , the custom to give high - sounding first - names . Since most of these seem to have been drawn from legends of the past , of Men as well as of Hobbits , and many while now meaningless to Hobbits closely resembled the names of Men in the Vale of Anduin , or in Dale , or in the Mark , I have turned names into those old names , largely of Frankish and Gothic origin , that are still used by us or are met in our histories . I have thus at any rate preserved the often comic contrast between the first - names and surnames , of which the Hobbits names were well aware . Names of classical origin have rarely been used ; for the nearest equivalents to Latin and Greek in Shire - lore were the Elvish tongues , and these the Hobbits seldom used in nomenclature . Few of these at any time knew the ‘ languages of the kings ’ , as these called tongues . 
  The names of the Bucklanders were different from those of the rest of the Shire . The folk of the Marish and tongues offshoot across the Brandywine were in many ways peculiar , as has been told . It was from the former language of the southern Stoors , no doubt , that tongues inherited many of tongues very odd names . These I have usually left unaltered , for if queer now , tongues were queer in tongues own day . tongues had a style that we should perhaps feel vaguely to be ‘ Celtic ’ . 
  Since the survival of traces of the older language of the Stoors and the Bree - men resembled the survival of Celtic elements in England , I have sometimes imitated the latter in my translation . Thus Bree , Combe ( Coomb ) , Archet , and Chetwood are modelled on relics of British nomenclature , chosen according to sense : Bree ‘ hill ’ chet ‘ wood ’ . But only one personal name has been altered in this way . Meriadoc was chosen to fit the fact that this character ’s shortened name , Kali , meant in the Westron ‘ jolly , gay ’ , though . was actually an abbreviation of the now unmeaning Buckland name Kalimac . 
  I have not used names of Hebraic or similar origin in my transpositions . Nothing in Hobbit - names corresponds to this element in our names . Short names such as Sam , Tom , Tim , Mat were common as abbreviations of actual Hobbit - names , such as Tomba , Tolma , Matta , and the like . But Sam and Sam father Ham were really called Ban and Ran . These were shortenings of Banazîr and Ranugad , originally nicknames , meaning ‘ halfwise , simple ’ and ‘ stay - at - home ’ ; but being words that had fallen out of colloquial use These remained as traditional names in certain families . I have therefore tried to preserve these features by using Samwise and Hamfast , modernizations of ancient English samwís and hámfæst which corresponded closely in meaning . 
  Having gone so far in my attempt to modernize and make familiar the language and names of Hobbits , I found myself involved in a further process . The Mannish languages that were related to the Westron should , it seemed to me , be turned into forms related to English . The English of Rohan I have accordingly made to resemble ancient English , since English was related both ( more distantly ) to the Common Speech , and ( very closely ) to the former English of the northern Hobbits , and was in comparison with the Westron archaic . In the Red Book it is noted in several places that when Hobbits heard the speech of Rohan places recognized many words and felt the English to be akin to places own , so that it seemed absurd to leave the recorded names and words of the Rohirrim in a wholly alien style . 
  In several cases I have modernized the forms and spellings of place - names in Rohan : as in Dunharrow or Snowbourn ; but I have not been consistent , for I have followed the Hobbits . Hobbits altered the names that Hobbits heard in the same way , if Hobbits were made of elements that Hobbits recognized , or if Hobbits resembled place - names in the Shire ; but many Hobbits left alone , as I have done , for instance , in Edoras ‘ the courts ’ . For the same reasons a few personal names have also been modernized , as Shadowfax and Wormtongue.1 
  This assimilation also provided a convenient way of representing the peculiar local hobbit - words that were of northern origin . names have been given the forms that lost English words might well have had , if names had come down to our day . Thus mathom is meant to recall ancient English máthm , and so to represent the relationship of the actual Hobbit kast to R. kastu . Similarly smial ( or smile ) ‘ burrow ’ is a likely form for a descendant of smygel , and represents well the relationship of Hobbit trân to R. trahan . Sméagol and Déagol are equivalents made up in the same way for the names Trahald ‘ burrowing , worming in ’ , and Nahald ‘ secret ’ in the Northern tongues . 
  The still more northerly language of Dale is in this book seen only in the names of the Dwarves that came from that region and so used the language of the Men there , taking Men ‘ outer ’ names in that tongue . It may be observed that in this book as in The Hobbit the form dwarves is used , although the dictionaries tell us that the plural of dwarf is dwarfs . plural should be dwarrows ( or dwerrows ) , if singular and plural had each gone each own way down the years , as have man and men , or goose and geese . But we no longer speak of a dwarf as often as we do of a man , or even of a goose , and memories have not been fresh enough among Men to keep hold of a special plural for a race now abandoned to folk - tales , where at least a shadow of truth is preserved , or at last to nonsense - stories in which Men have become mere figures of fun . But in the Third Age something of Men old character and power is still glimpsed , if already a little dimmed ; these are the descendants of the Naugrim of the Elder Days , in whose hearts still burns the ancient fire of Aulë the Smith , and the embers smoulder of embers long grudge against the Elves ; and in whose hands still lives the skill in work of stone that none have surpassed . 
  It is to mark this that I have ventured to use the form dwarves , and remove dwarves a little , perhaps , from the sillier tales of these latter days . Dwarrows would have been better ; but I have used that form only in the name Dwarrowdelf , to represent the name of Moria in the Common Speech : Phurunargian . For that meant ‘ Dwarf - delving ’ and yet was already a word of antique form . But Moria is an Elvish name , and given without love ; for the Eldar , though name might at need , in name bitter wars with the Dark Power and man servants , contrive fortresses underground , were not dwellers in such places of choice . name were lovers of the green earth and the lights of heaven ; and Moria in name tongue means the Black Chasm . But the Dwarves name , and this name at least was never kept secret , called Chasm Khazad - dûm , the Mansion of the Khazâd ; for such is name own name for name own race , and has been so , since Aulë gave Chasm to name at name making in the deeps of time . 
  Elves has been used to translate both Quendi , ‘ the speakers ’ , the High - elven name of all Quendi kind , and Eldar , the name of the Three Kindreds that sought for the Undying Realm and came there at the beginning of Days ( save the Sindar only ) . This old word was indeed the only one available , and was once fitted to apply to such memories of this people as Men preserved , or to the makings of Men ’s minds not wholly dissimilar . But word has been diminished , and to many word may now suggest fancies either pretty or silly , as unlike to the Quendi of old as are butterflies to the swift falcon - not that any of the Quendi ever possessed wings of the body , as unnatural to wings as to Men . wings were a race high and beautiful , the older Children of the world , and among wings the Eldar were as kings , who now are gone : the People of the Great Journey , the People of the Stars . wings were tall , fair of skin and grey - eyed , though wings locks were dark , save in the golden house of Finarfin;1 and wings voices had more melodies than any mortal voice that now is heard . wings were valiant , but the history of those that returned to Middle - earth in exile was grievous ; and though history was in far - off days crossed by the fate of the Fathers , wings fate is not that of Men . wings dominion passed long ago , and wings dwell now beyond the circles of the world , and do not return . 
  Note on three names : Hobbit , Gamgee , and Brandywine . 
  Hobbit is an invention . In the Westron the word used , when this people was referred to at all , was banakil ‘ halfling ’ . But at this date the folk of the Shire and of Bree used the word kuduk , which was not found elsewhere . Meriadoc , however , actually records that the King of Rohan used the word kûd - dûkan ‘ hole - dweller ’ . Since , as has been noted , the Hobbits had once spoken a language closely related to that of the Rohirrim , it seems likely that kuduk was a worn - down form of kûd - dûkan . The latter I have translated , for reasons explained , by holbytla ; and hobbit provides a word that might well be a worn - down form of holbytla , if that name had occurred in our own ancient language . 
  Gamgee . According to family tradition , set out in the Red Book , the surname Galbasi , or in reduced form Galpsi , came from the village of Galabas , popularly supposed to be derived from galab- ‘ game ’ and an old element bas- , more or less equivalent to our wick , wich . Gamwich ( pronounced Gammidge ) seemed therefore a very fair rendering . However , in reducing Gammidgy to Gamgee , to represent Galpsi , no reference was intended to the connexion of Samwise with the family of Cotton , though a jest of that kind would have been hobbit - like enough , had there been any warrant in family language . 
  Cotton , in fact , represents Hlothran , a fairly common village - name in the Shire , derived from hloth , ‘ a two - roomed dwelling or hole ’ , and ran(u ) a small group of such dwellings on a hill - side . As a surname hloth may be an alteration of hlothram(a ) ‘ cottager ’ . Hlothram , which I have rendered Cotman , was the name of Farmer Cotton ’s grandfather . 
  Brandywine . The hobbit - names of this river were alterations of the Elvish Baranduin ( accented on and ) , derived from baran ‘ golden brown ’ and Baranduin ‘ ( large ) river ’ . Of Baranduin Brandywine seemed a natural corruption in modern times . Actually the older hobbit - name was Branda - nîn ‘ border - water ’ , which would have been more closely rendered by Marchbourn ; but by a jest that had become habitual , referring again to jest colour , at this time the river was usually called Bralda - hîm ‘ heady ale ’ . 
  It must be observed , however , that when the Oldbucks ( Zaragamba ) changed Oldbucks name to Brandybuck ( Brandagamba ) , the first element meant ‘ borderland ’ , and Marchbuck would have been nearer . Only a very bold hobbit would have ventured to call the Master of Buckland Braldagamba in Marchbuck hearing . 
  INDEX 
  Compiled by Christina Scull & Wayne G. Hammond 
  The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which pagination was created . To locate a specific passage , please use the search feature of your e - book reader . 
  This list has been compiled independent of that prepared by Nancy Smith and revised by J.R.R. Tolkien for the second edition ( 1965 ) of The Lord of the Rings and augmented in later printings ; but for the final result reference has been made to the earlier index in order to resolve questions of content and to preserve Tolkien ’s occasional added notes and ‘ translations ’ [ here indicated within square brackets ] . We have also referred to the index that Tolkien Smith began to prepare during 1954 , but which Marchbuck left unfinished after dealing only with place - names . Marchbuck had intended , as Marchbuck said in Marchbuck original foreword to The Lord of the Rings , to provide ‘ an index of names and strange words with some explanations ’ ; but foreword soon became clear that such a work would be too long and costly , easily a short volume unto work . ( Tolkien ’s manuscript list of place - names informed Marchbuck son Christopher ’s indexes in The Silmarillion and Unfinished Tales , and is referred to also in the present authors ’ The Lord of the Rings : A Reader ’s Companion . ) 
  Readers have long complained that the original index is too brief and fragmented for serious use . In the present work citations are given more comprehensively for names of persons , places , and things , and unusual ( invented ) words , mentioned or alluded to in the text ( i.e. excluding the maps ) ; and there is a single main sequence of entries , now preceded by a list of poems and songs by first line and a list of poems and phrases in languages other than English ( Common Speech ) . Nonetheless , although this new index is greatly enlarged compared with index predecessor , some constraints on index length were necessary so that index might fit comfortably after the Appendices . Thus it has not been possible to index separately or to cross - reference every variation of every name in The Lord of the Rings ( of which there are thousands ) , and we have had to be particularly selective when indexing Appendices D through F , concentrating on those names or terms that feature in the main text , and when subdividing entries by aspect . 
  Primary entry elements have been chosen usually according to predominance in The Lord of the Rings , but sometimes based on familiarity or ease of reference : thus ( for instance ) predominant Nazgûl rather than Ringwraiths or even less frequent Black Riders , and predominant and familiar Treebeard rather than Fangorn , with cross - references from ( as - seem to us ) the most important alternate terms . Names of bays , bridges , fords , gates , towers , vales , etc . including ‘ Bay ’ , ‘ Bridge ’ , etc . are entered usually under the principal element , e.g. Belfalas , Bay of rather than Bay of Belfalas . Names of battles and mountains are entered directly , e.g. Battle of Bywater , Mount Doom . With one exception ( Rose Cotton ) , married female hobbits are indexed under the husband ’s surname , with selective cross - references from maiden names . 
  I. Poems and Songs 
  A Elbereth Gilthoniel 238 
  A Elbereth Gilthoniel ( another poem ) 729 
  A ! Elbereth Gilthoniel ! 1028 
  Ai ! laurië lantar lassi súrinen ! 377–8 
  Alive without breath 621 
  All that is gold does not glitter 170 , 247 
  Arise , arise , Riders of Théoden ! 838 
  Arise now , arise , Riders of Théoden ! 517 
  Cold be hand and heart and bone 141 
  Cold hard lands , The 620 
  Eärendil was a mariner 233–6 
  Elven - maid there was of old , An 339–41 
  Ents the earthborn , old as mountains 586 
  Ere iron was found or was hewn 544 
  Faithful servant yet master ’s bane 845 
  Farewell we call to hearth and hall ! 106 
  From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning 803 
  Get out , you old Wight ! Vanish in the sunlight ! 142 
  Gil - galad was an Elven - king 185 
  Gondor ! Gondor , between the Mountains and the Sea ! 423 
  Grey as a mouse 646 
  Hey ! Come derry dol ! Hop along , my hearties ! 122 
  Hey ! Come merry dol ! derry dol ! My darling ! 119 
  Hey dol ! merry dol ! ring a dong dillo ! 119 
  Hey ! now ! Come hoy now ! Whither do you wander ? 144 
  Ho ! Ho ! Ho ! to the bottle I go 90 
  Ho ! Tom Bombadil , Tom Bombadillo ! 134 , 142 
  Hop along , my little friends , up the Withywindle ! 121 
  I had an errand there : gathering water - lilies 126 
  I sang of leaves , of leaves of gold , and leaves of gold there grew 372–3 
  I sit beside the fire and think 278–9 
  In Dwimordene , in Lórien 514 
  In the willow - meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring 469 
  In western lands beneath the Sun 908–9 
  Learn now the lore of Living Creatures ! 464 
  Leaves were long , the grass was green , The 191–3 
  Legolas Greenleaf long under tree 503 
  Long live the Halflings ! Praise Halflings with great praise ! 953 
  Mourn not overmuch ! Mighty was the fallen 843 
  Now let the song begin ! Let us sing together 122 
  O Orofarnë , Lassemista , Carnimírië ! 483–4 
  O slender as a willow - wand ! O clearer than clear water ! 124 
  O ! Wanderers in the shadowed land 112 
  Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow 124 , 142 
  Out of doubt , out of dark to the day ’s rising 847 
  Out of doubt , out of dark , to the day ’s rising 976 
  Over the land there lies a long shadow 781 
  Road goes ever on and on , The ( three poems ) 35 , 73 , 987 
  Seek for the Sword that was broken 246 
  Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui 875 
  Sing hey ! for the bath at close of day 101 
  Sing now , ye people of the Tower of Anor 963 
  Snow - white ! Snow - white ! O Lady clear ! 79 
  Still round the corner there may wait 1028 
  Tall ships and tall kings 597 
  There is an inn , a merry old inn 158–60 
  Three Rings for the Elven - kings under the sky 50 
  Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows 417–18 
  To Isengard ! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone 485 
  To the Sea , to the Sea ! The white gulls are crying 956 
  Tom ’s country ends here : Tom will not pass the borders 148 
  Troll sat alone on Tom seat of stone 206–8 
  Upon the hearth the fire is red 77 
  Wake now my merry lads ! Wake and hear me calling ! 143 
  We come , we come with horn and drum : ta - rūna rūna rūna rom ! 484 
  We come , we come with roll of drum : ta - runda runda runda rom ! 484 
  We heard of the horns in the hills ringing 849 
  When evening in the Shire was grey 359–60 
  When spring unfolds the beechen leaf , and sap is in the bough 477 
  When the black breath blows 865 
  When winter first begins to bite 273 
  Where now are the Dúnedain , Elessar , Elessar ? 503 
  Where now the horse and the rider ? 
  Where is the horn that was blowing ? 508 
  World was young , the mountains green , The 315–17 
  II . Poems and Phrases in Languages Other Than Common Speech 
  A Elbereth Gilthoniel … ( variants ) 238 , 729 
  A ! Elbereth Gilthoniel ! … 1028 
  A laita te , laita te ! Andava laituvalmet ! 953 
  A - lalla - lalla - rumba - kamanda - lind - or - burúmë 465 
  Ai ! laurië lantar lassi súrinen … 377 
  Ai na vedui Dúnadan ! Mae govannen ! 209 
  Aiya Eärendil Elenion Ancalima ! 720 
  Aiyaelenion ancalima ! 915 
  Annon edhellen , edro hi ammen ! … 307 
  Arwen vanimelda , namárië ! 352 
  Ash nazg durbatulûk … 254 
  Baruk Khazâd ! Khazâd ai - mênu ! 534 , 1132 
  Conin en Annûn ! Eglerio ! 953 
  Cormacolindor , a laita tárienna ! 953 
  Cuio i Pheriain anann ! Aglar’ni Pheriannath ! 953 
  Daur a Berhael , Conin en Annûn ! 
  Eglerio ! 953 
  Elen síla lúmenn ’ omentielvo 81 
  Ennyn Durin Aran Moria 305 
  Ernil i Pheriannath 768 
  Et Eärello Endorenna utúlien … 967 
  Ferthu Théoden hál ! 522 
  Galadhremmin ennorath 1115 ( cf . 238 ) 
  Gilthoniel , A Elbereth ! 729 , 915 
  Khazâd ai - mênu ! 535 
  Laurelindórenan lindelorendor malinornélion ornemalin 467 
  Naur an edraith ammen ! 290 , 299 
  Naur dan i ngaurhoth ! 299 
  Noro lim , noro lim , Asfaloth ! 213 
  O Orofarnë , Lassemista , Carnimírië ! 483 , 484 
  ónen i - Estel Edain , ú - chebin estel anim 1061 
  Taurelilómëa - tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurëa Lómëanor 467 , 1131 
  Uglúk u bagronk sha pushdug Sarumanglob búbhosh skai 445 
  Westu Théoden hál ! 518 
  Yé ! utúvienyes ! 971 
  III . Persons , Places , and Things 
  Accursed Years 787 
  Adorn 1065 , 1069 
  Adrahil 1056 , 1089 
  Adûnaic 1035 , 1036 , 1114 , 1116 , 1129 
  Adûnakhôr 1114 
  Aeglos [ Icicle ] , Spear of Gil - galad 243 
  Aglarond see Glittering Caves of Aglarond 
  Akallabêth 1035 
  Aldalómë 469 
  Aldamir 1038 , 1086 
  Aldor the Old 977 , 1068 , 1070 
  Alfirin 875 
  Alphabets see Writing and spelling 
  Aman ( Blessed Realm , Undying Lands , Undying Realm , Uttermost West , the West , Western Shore , Land beyond the Sea , etc . ) 45 , 131 , 223 , 244 , 341 , 365 , 366 , 670 , 676 , 956 , 975 , 1030 , 1034 , 1035 , 1037 , 1039 , 1062 , 1063 , 1065 , 1082 , 1084 , 1128 , 1137 ; see also Eressëa ; Valimar ; Valinor 
  Amandil 1036 
  Ambaróna 469 
  Amlaith 1038 
  Amon Dîn ( Dîn ) 747 , 830 , 832 , 833 , 834 , 972 , 976 
  Amon Hen ( Hill of Sight , Hill of the Eye ) 389 , 393–4 , 395 , 396 , 400–2 , 405 , 413 , 418 , 639 , 644 ; seat on ( Seat of Seeing ) 400 , 402 , 405 , 413 
  Amon Lhaw ( Hill of Hearing ) 393–4 , 395 , 401 , 402 , 407 ; seat on 402 
  Amon Sûl see Weathertop 
  Amroth 340–1 , 1087 ; name 1127 ; Amroth ’s haven 340 , 872 ; mound of see Cerin Amroth ; see also Dol Amroth 
  Anardil 1038 
  Anárion 242 , 244 , 252 , 393 , 597 , 663 , 678 , 1037 , 1038 , 1043 , 1044 , 1049 , 1056 , 1057 , 1084 ; heirs , House of ( Southern Line ) 670 , 854 , 1038 , 1045 ; name 1128 
  Anborn 675 , 684–8 passim , 691 
  Ancalagon the Black 61 
  Ancient World 356 
  Anduin ( Great River , the River , River of Gondor ) 3 , 8 , 52–3 , 58 , 244 , 245 , 250 , 251 , 254 , 257 , 258 , 268 , 274 , 281 , 283 , 335 , 338 , 339 , 341 , 347 , 348 , 351 , 367–407 passim , 413 , 415–19 passim , 421 , 422 , 425 , 429 , 436 , 437 , 440 , 446 , 452 , 459 , 476 , 492 , 495 , 496 , 564 , 603 , 604 , 616 , 639 , 641 , 642 , 646 , 648 , 650 , 658 , 659 , 661 , 666 , 667 , 684 , 697 , 707 , 750 , 755 , 759 , 763 , 764 , 765 , 789 , 799 , 808 , 809 , 812 , 816 , 817 , 821 , 822 , 824 , 834 , 839 , 843 , 846–9 passim , 853 , 873–8 passim , 881 , 884 , 890 , 955 , 956 , 957 , 965 , 971 , 979 , 1014 , 1045–9 passim , 1053 , 1054 , 1055 , 1064 , 1077 , 1084 , 1089 , 1094 , 1095 , 1098 , 1127 , 1130 ; mouths , delta of ( Ethir [ outflow ] Anduin ) 242 , 290 , 400 , 417 , 659 , 771 , 846 , 877 , 1044 , 1129 ; sources of 1063 
  Anduin , Vale(s ) of [ lowlands watered by Anduin from Lórien to the Ethir ; the ‘ lower vales ’ south of Rauros ; north of Lórien were the ‘ upper vales ’ ] 3 , 609 , 807 , 824 , 884 , 919 , 970 , 1045 , 1051 , 1053 , 1063 , 1064 , 1090 , 1110 , 1127 , 1129 , 1135 ; Men of Anduin ’s Vale 1064 
  Andúnië , Lords of 1035 , 1043 
  Andúril ( Flame of the West , the Sword , the Sword Reforged ) 277 , 279 , 324 , 325 , 368 , 374 , 433 , 437 , 494 , 500 , 510–11 , 533–4 , 537 , 759 , 780 , 848 , 879 , 882 , 923 , 967 ; see also Narsil 
  Anfalas see Langstrand 
  Angamaitë 1048 
  Angband 193 
  Angbor , Lord of Lamedon 875 , 877 , 881 
  Angerthas Daeron 1123–6 
  Angerthas Moria 1118 , 1123–6 
  Angle , between Hoarwell and Loudwater 1040–1 , 1085 , 1086 , 1120 
  Angle , in Lothlórien 347 
  Angmar 5 , 146 , 185 , 201 , 844 , 1040 , 1041 , 1049 , 1050 , 1051 , 1064 , 1078 , 1086 ; Lord of see Witch - king 
  Angrenost see Isengard 
  Ann - thennath 193 
  Annúminas 244 , 598 , 1037 , 1042 , 1044 , 1086 ; palantír of 598 , 1042 ; sceptre of ( sceptre of Arnor ) 972 , 1043 , 1057 , 1062 
  Anor , flame of 330 
  Anor - stone see Palantír 
  Anórien ( Sunlending ) 747 , 750 , 765 , 803 , 821 , 834 , 882 , 883 , 976 , 1047 , 1054 , 1093 , 1115 , 1127 ; East Anórien 830 
  Appledore , surname 155 
  Appledore , Rowlie 992 
  Ar - Adûnakhor ‘ Lord of the West ’ 1035 , 1036 , 1084 
  Ar - Gimilzôr 1035 
  Ar - Inziladûn see Tar - Palantir 
  Angmar - Pharazôn ‘ the Golden ’ 1035 , 1036–7 , 1043 , 1047 , 1084 , 1114 
  Ar - Sakalthôr 1035 
  Ar - Zimrathôn 1035 
  Arador 1038 , 1057 , 1089 
  Araglas 1038 
  Aragorn I 1038 , 1043 
  Aragorn II , son of Arathorn II ( Strider , heir of Elendil and Isildur , Captain , Chieftain , Lord of the Dúnedain of Arnor , Captain of the Host of the West , chief of the Rangers , King of the Númenóreans , King of Gondor and the Western Lands , Lord of the White Tree , etc . ) 14 , 15 , 58 , 146 , 156–7 , 160–214 passim , 220–4 passim , 227 , 231 , 232 , 233 , 237 , 238 , 239 , 246 , 247 , 248 , 251 , 253 , 255 , 262 , 263 , 264 , 273–406 passim , 413–45 passim , 449 , 453 , 482 , 488–550 passim , 552 , 556–75 passim , 577 , 584 , 585 , 588 , 594 , 595 , 596 , 599–600 , 643 , 644 , 653 , 658 , 663–4 , 670 , 677 , 680 , 708 , 753 , 754 , 759 , 760 , 761 , 773–90 passim , 795–8 passim , 802 , 810 , 815 , 847–9 , 853 , 861–91 passim , 897 , 923 , 948 , 949 , 951–8 passim , 960 , 963–83 passim , 986–90 passim , 993–4 , 995 , 1005 , 1034 , 1039 , 1043–4 , 1047 , 1050 , 1055–63 passim , 1070 , 1071 , 1079 , 1080 , 1088–98 passim , 1105 , 1112 , 1133 , 1134 ; ( the ) Dúnadan 209 , 231 , 232–3 , 237 , 248 , 433 , 653 , 1061 ; Elessar [ name given to Aragorn in Lothlórien and adopted by Aragorn as King ] 14 , 15 , 375 , 393 , 433 , 503 , 789 , 847 , 863 , 885 , 967 , 968 , 972 , 976 , 1039 , 1044 , 1047 , 1070 , 1071 , 1079 , 1080 , 1095 , 1097 , 1098 , 1105 , 1112 , 1128 , see also Elfstone following ; Elessar Telcontar 1039 ; Elfstone 775 , 871 , 884 , 966 , 975 , 982 ; Envinyatar , the Renewer 863 ; Estel 1057 , 1058 , 1061 , 1063 , 1089 ; Longshanks 181 ; Strider [ used in Bree and by Estel hobbit - companions ] frequently , especially 156–239 ; Stick - at - naught Strider 181 ; Telcontar 863 ; Thorongil [ eagle of star ] 1055 , 1056 , 1090 ; Wingfoot 436 ; as healer 198–9 , 335–6 , 545 , 860 , 862–71 , 952 , 956 , 958 , 960 , 966 , 967 ; names 1128 ; of the children of Lúthien 876 ; one of the Three Hunters 420 , 491 ; Estel standard wrought by Arwen 775 , 778 , 789 , 847 , 848 , 861 , 877 , 887 , 891 , 948 , 953 , 968 , 1061 , 1057 , 1061 , 1062 , 1094 
  Aragost 1038 
  Arahad I 1038 , 1043 
  Arahad II 1038 
  Arahael 1038 , 1043 
  Aranarth 1038 , 1041 , 1043 , 1057 , 1086 
  Arantar 1038 
  Aranuir 1038 
  Araphant 1038 , 1049 , 1050 
  Araphor 1038 , 1040 
  Arassuil 1038 
  Arathorn I 1038 
  Arathorn II 1038 , 1057 , 1089 ; see also Aragorn II , son of Arathorn II 
  Araval 1038 
  Aravir 1038 
  Aravorn 1038 
  Araw see Oromë 
  Archet 149 , 151 , 168 , 180 , 181 , 182 , 992 ; name 1135 
  Arciryas 1050 
  Argeleb I 1038 , 1040 , 1086 
  Argeleb II 4 , 1038 , 1041 , 1086 
  Argonath ( Pillars of the Kings , Gate of Kings , Gates of Gondor , the Gates , sentinels of Númenor ) 245 , 268 , 389 , 391 , 392–3 , 402 , 418 , 426 , 433 , 702 , 754 , 799 , 1046 , 1092 
  Argonui 1038 
  Arkenstone 1072 , 1078 
  Army of the West see Host of the West 
  Arnach see Lossarnach 
  Arnor ( North Kingdom , Northern Kingdom , Northlands , etc . ) 4 , 5 , 185 , 201 , 242 , 243 , 244 , 252 , 563 , 597 , 598 , 844 , 849 , 862 , 967 , 982 , 1037–44 passim , 1049 , 1050 , 1051 , 1061 , 1062 , 1071 , 1084 , 1085 , 1086 , 1097 , 1108 ; Realm in Exile 1038 , 1084 ; calendar of 1107 , 1110 ; High Kings of 1038 , 1039 ; language of 1038 , 1039–44 , 1062 , 1084 , 1086 , 1097 , 1127 , 1130 ; palantír of 1086 ; sceptre of see Annúminas ; star of the North Kingdom see Elendilmir 
  Arod 439 , 443 , 488 , 504–6 , 509 , 524 , 560 , 773 , 786 , 976 
  Artamir 1049 
  Arthedain 1038 , 1039–41 , 1050 , 1086 
  Arvedui ‘ Last - king ’ 4 , 781 , 1038 , 1039 , 1041–3 , 1049–50 , 1086 
  Arvegil 1038 , 1044 
  Arveleg I 1038 , 1040 , 1086 
  Arveleg II 1038 
  Arwen ( Lady , the Lady of Rivendell , etc . ) 227 , 230 , 233 , 238 , 352 , 375 , 775 , 847 , 972–8 passim , 982 , 1034 , 1035 , 1058–63 passim , 1080 , 1085 , 1089 , 1090 , 1094 , 1095 , 1097 ; Evenstar 227 , 375 , 972 , 975 , 1044 , 1059 ; Queen Arwen 974 , 976 ; 1097 ; Queen of Elves and Men 1062 ; Undómiel [ cf . Undómë 1111 ] 227 , 973 , 1058 , 1060 , 1061 , 1085 , 1090 ; recalled , alluded to by Aragorn 194 , 202 , 280 , 352 , 375 , 784 ; gift to Frodo ( passage into the West ) 974–5 ; gift to Frodo ( white gem ) 975 , 1024 , 1025 ; standard Frodo wrought for Aragorn see Aragorn II 
  Asëa aranion see Athelas 
  Asfaloth 209 , 211–14 passim , 222 , 223 
  Ashen ( Ash ) Mountains see Ered Lithui 
  Atanatar I 1038 
  Atanatar II Alcarin ‘ the Glorious ’ 1038 , 1043 , 1044 , 1045 , 1085 
  Atani see Edain 
  Athelas ( asëa aranion , kingsfoil ) [ a healing herb ] 198–9 , 336 , 863–9 passim 
  Aulë the Smith 1137 
  Avernien 233 
  Azanulbizar see Dimrill Dale ; Battle of Nanduhirion ( Azanulbizar ) 
  Azog 1073–6 passim , 1078 
  Bag End 11 , 13 , 21–47 passim , 62–70 passim , 74 , 75 , 99 , 100 , 103 , 105 , 167 , 169 , 184 , 202 , 263 , 273 , 318 , 699 , 910 , 998 , 1000 , 1001 , 1004 , 1006 , 1009 , 1012 , 1013 , 1014 , 1017–25 passim , 1031 , 1091 , 1097 
  Baggins family 9 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 37 , 49 , 278 , 1100 ; name 59 
  Baggins , Angelica 37 , 1100 
  Baggins , Balbo 1100 , 1102 
  Baggins , Belladonna née Took 1100 , 1103 
  Baggins , Berylla née Boffin 1100 , 1102 
  Baggins , Bilbo 1–7 passim , 10–15 passim , 21–49 passim , 54–68 passim , 73–7 passim , 80 , 81 , 83 , 94–5 , 100–6 passim , 132 , 140 , 157 , 158 , 169 , 186 , 201 , 206 , 208 , 224–5 , 228–33 passim , 236–41 passim , 247–8 , 249 , 254 , 265 , 269–73 passim , 277–9 , 281 , 288 , 290 , 317–18 , 321 , 328 , 336 , 360 , 364 , 383 , 397 , 404 , 441 , 461 , 615 , 620–1 , 633 , 640 , 680 , 711 , 731 , 732 , 893 , 908 , 955 , 956 , 970 , 974 , 984–8 passim , 1017 , 1026 , 1028 , 1029 , 1033 , 1043 , 1088 , 1089 , 1090 , 1096 , 1100 , 1102 , 1115 ; birthday , birthday - parties 14 , 21–2 , 24–31 , 34 , 36–7 , 42 , 43 , 65 , 67–8 , 157 , 273 , 985–6 , 1026 , 1028 ; book , diary see Red Book of Westmarch 
  Baggins , Bingo 38 , 1100 
  Baggins , Bungo 1100 , 1103 
  Baggins , Camellia née Sackville 1100 
  Baggins , Chica née Chubb 1100 
  Baggins , Dora 37 , 1100 
  Baggins , Drogo 22–3 , 37 , 1100 , 1101 , 1104 ; see also Baggins , Frodo , son of Drogo 
  Baggins , Dudo 1100 
  Baggins , Fosco 1100 , 1101 
  Baggins , Frodo , son of Drogo ( Ring - bearer , Mr. Underhill , the Halfling , etc . ) 2 , 10 , 13 , 15 , 21–2 , 23 , 28 , 30–407 passim , 413 , 414 , 415 , 418 , 419 , 426 , 434 , 440 , 444 , 450 , 453 , 482 , 490 , 495–6 , 516 , 571 , 603–742 passim , 748 , 749 , 753 , 792 , 796 , 808 , 811–12 , 813 , 815 , 879 , 880 , 885 , 887 , 889 , 890 , 892 , 897 , 898 , 899 , 902 , 903 , 904 , 907 , 908 , 910–57 passim , 966 , 968 , 970 , 972 , 974–5 , 982 , 984–1030 passim , 1041 , 1078 , 1090–6 passim , 1100–4 passim , 1112 , 1133 ; Daur 593 ; and story of the Ring of Doom ( Frodo of the Nine Fingers ) 712 , 950 , 954 
  Baggins , Gilly née Brownlock 1100 
  Baggins , Largo 1100 , 1102 
  Baggins , Laura née Grubb 1100 , 1102 
  Baggins , Longo 1100 
  Baggins , Mimosa née Bunce 1100 
  Baggins , Mungo 1100 , 1102 
  Baggins , Polo 1100 
  Baggins , Ponto , the elder 1100 
  Baggins , Ponto , the younger 1100 
  Baggins , Porto 1100 
  Baggins , Posco 1100 
  Baggins , Primula née Brandybuck 23 , 1100 , 1103 , 1104 
  Baggins , Ruby née Bolger 1100 , 1101 
  Baggins , Tanta née Hornblower 1100 
  Bagshot Row 22 , 26 , 38 , 69 , 70 , 76 , 363 , 652 , 995 , 1011 , 1014 , 1016 , 1022 
  Bain , son of Bard , King of Dale 229 , 1090 
  Balchoth 1053 , 1064 
  Baldor 787 , 797–8 , 977 , 1068 , 1087 
  Balin , son of Fundin 229 , 231 , 240–1 , 268 , 297 , 318 , 320 , 321–3 , 324 , 356 , 1076 , 1077 , 1079 , 1089 , 1090 ; tomb of 319–20 , 321 , 325 
  Balrog ( Durin ’s Bane , elf - bane ) 317 , 326 , 327 , 329–31 , 356 , 360 , 387–8 , 501–2 , 677 , 1072 , 1075 , 1087 , 1092 
  Bamfurlong 91 
  Banks , surname 155 
  Banks , Willie 992 
  Barad - dûr ( Dark Tower , Fortress of Sauron , Lugbúrz , Great Tower , the Tower , etc . ) 44 , 51 , 226 , 244 , 250 , 251 , 253 , 276 , 296 , 356 , 401 , 416 , 446 , 451 , 452 , 454 , 495 , 497 , 555 , 564 , 583 , 589 , 594 , 598 , 599 , 604 , 635 , 637 , 643 , 644 , 657 , 659 , 723 , 737–41 passim , 823 , 878–9 , 880 , 888 , 890 , 900 , 901 , 902 , 905 , 919 , 923 , 931 , 932 , 935 , 936 , 938 , 942 , 946 , 948 , 963 , 966 , 1005 , 1043 , 1044 , 1055 , 1061 , 1067 , 1082 , 1083 , 1084 , 1089 , 1094 , 1095 , 1111 , 1131 , 1132 ; hosts of see Sauron ; name ( Dark Tower ) 1134 ; sometimes used as a synonym for Sauron 
  Barahir , father of Beren 193 , 1034 , 1042 ; see also Beren , son of Barahir ; Ring of Barahir 
  Barahir , grandson of Faramir 15 
  Barahir , steward 1039 
  Baranduin see Brandywine 
  Barazinbar ( Baraz ) see Caradhras 
  Bard of Esgaroth ( Bard the Bowman ) 229 , 1078 , 1089 , 1090 
  Bard II of Dale 1095 
  Bardings see Dale : Men of 
  Barrow - downs ( Downlands ) 113 , 114 , 122 , 129 , 130 , 133 , 136–46 passim , 151 , 163 , 179 , 262 , 442 , 844 , 996 , 1040 , 1041 , 1130 ; Tyrn Gorthad 1040 , 1041 , 1086 ; north - gate of 138 
  Barrowfield 507 , 787 , 976–7 , 1067 , 1069 
  Barrows ( mounds ) 130 , 133–4 , 139–43 , 185 , 756 ; barrow in which Frodo is imprisoned 140–3 , 145 , 195 , 219 , 719 , 731 , 1041 ; knives from see Swords ; of the kings of Rohan see Barrowfield ; see also Mound of the Riders 
  Barrow - wight(s ) ( Wights ) 130 , 131 , 133 , 140–3 , 144 , 145 , 185 , 265 , 756 , 1091 
  Battle Gardens 1022 
  Battle of Azanulbizar see Battle of Nanduhirion 
  Battle of Bywater 1015–16 , 1021 , 1096 ; Roll of 1016 
  Battle of Dagorlad ( Great Battle ) 243 , 628 , 671 , 1043 , 1084 
  Battle of Dale , 2941 Third Age see Battle of Five Armies 
  Battle of Dale , 3019 Third Age 1094 
  Battle of Five Armies ( of Dale ) 11 , 47 , 229 , 296 , 1078 , 1079 , 1089 
  Battle of Fornost 1051 , 1086 
  Battle of Greenfields 5 , 1016 
  Battle of Nanduhirion ( Azanulbizar ) 1074 , 1079 , 1088 
  Battle of the Camp 1049 , 1086 
  Battle of the Crossings of Erui 1047 , 1086 
  Battle of the Barrowfield of Gondor see Battle of the Pelennor Fields 
  Battle of the Barrowfield of Celebrant 512 , 678 , 976 , 1064 , 1065 , 1087 
  Battle of the Hornburg 532–42 , 1093 
  Battle of the Peak , i.e. Celebdil 502 
  Battle of the Pelennor Fields 818 , 819–25 , 828–9 , 836–49 , 856 , 858 , 877 , 878 , 881 , 919 , 1062 , 1069 , 1070 , 1080 , 1093–4 
  Battle Plain see Dagorlad 
  Battles of the Fords of Isen 513 , 527 , 550–2 , 1092 , 1093 
  Beacon hills , beacons 747 , 748 , 765 , 804–5 
  Beechbone 568 
  Belecthor I 1039 
  Belecthor II 1039 , 1054 , 1088 
  Beleg 1038 
  Belegorn 1039 
  Belegost 1071 
  Beleriand ( Northern Lands , Norland ) 193 , 236 , 305 , 722 , 723 , 1041 , 1115 , 1117–18 , 1128 
  Belfalas 4 , 748 , 750 , 765 , 846 
  Belfalas , Bay of 341 , 381 
  Béma see Oromë 
  Beorn 228 
  Beornings 228 , 369–70 , 400 , 431 , 1063 , 1094 ; honey cakes of 369 ; land of 400 ; language of 1129 
  Beregond , son of Baranor ( Beregond of the Guard ) 760–7 , 769 , 771–2 , 807 , 808–9 , 810 , 818 , 827 , 850 , 851–7 passim , 862 , 866 , 870 , 883 , 884 , 892 , 968–9 ; see also Bergil , son of Beregond 
  Beregond , steward 1039 , 1054 
  Beren , son of Barahir ( Beren One - hand ) 191–4 , 271 , 277 , 712 , 723 , 728 , 950 , 1034 , 1042 , 1058 , 1059 , 1082 ; name 1128 ; Beren and Lúthien , lay of 277 
  Beren , steward 1039 , 1054 , 1067 
  Bergil , son of Beregond 768 , 769–71 , 859 , 865 , 866 , 883–4 
  Berúthiel , Queen , cats of 311 
  Beryl , an elf - stone 201 
  Better Smials 1022 
  Bifur 229 , 1079 
  Big Folk , Big People see Men 
  Bill , pony 179 , 180 , 181 , 186 , 199 , 203 , 204 , 205 , 211 , 280 , 284 , 287 , 289–90 , 293 , 298 , 301–2 , 303–4 , 307 , 308 , 309 , 312 , 990 , 994 , 995 , 999 , 1027 
  Birds , as spies 183–4 , 284–6 , 294 , 416 , 548 , 766 
  Birthday , Bilbo and Frodo ’s see Baggins , Bilbo 
  Black Breath ( Black Shadow ) 173 , 256 , 860 , 864 , 865 , 871 
  Black Captain see Witch - king 
  Black Country see Mordor 
  Black fleet ( black sails , black ships ) 847 , 853 , 863 , 875–7 , 897 , 955 , 1093 
  Black Gate(s ) of Mordor see Morannon 
  Black Land see Mordor 
  Black Númenóreans see Númenóreans 
  Black One ( Black Hand ) see Sauron 
  Black Riders see Nazgûl 
  Black Shadow see Black Breath 
  Black Speech ( language of Mordor ) 50 , 253 , 254 , 1117 , 1122 , 1131–2 
  Black Stone see Stone of Erech 
  Black Years 51 , 254 
  Blackroot see Morthond 
  Blanco 4 , 1099 
  Blessed Realm see Aman 
  Blue Mountains ( Ered Luin , Mountains of Lune ) 4 , 43 , 185 , 468 , 1039 , 1041 , 1071 , 1076 , 1082 , 1083 , 1088 
  Bob 153 , 160 , 178 , 179 , 991 
  Boffin family 9 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 37 , 39 , 49 , 1102 ; name 1135 
  Boffin , Basso 1102 
  Boffin , Bosco 1102 
  Boffin , Briffo 1102 
  Boffin , Buffo 1102 
  Boffin , Daisy née Baggins 1100 , 1102 
  Boffin , Donnamira née Took 1102 , 1103 
  Boffin , Druda née Burrows 1102 
  Boffin , Folco 42 , 67 , 68 , 1102 
  Boffin , Griffo 1100 , 1102 
  Boffin , Gruffo 1102 
  Boffin , Hugo 1102 , 1103 
  Boffin , Ivy née Goodenough 1102 
  Boffin , Jago 1102 
  Boffin , Lavender née Grubb 1102 
  Boffin , Mr. 44 
  Boffin , Otto ‘ the Fat ’ 1102 
  Boffin , Rollo 1102 
  Boffin , Sapphira née Brockhouse 1102 
  Boffin , Tosto 1102 
  Boffin , Gruffo 1102 
  Boffin , Vigo 1102 
  Bofur 229 , 1079 
  Bolg 1073 , 1078 
  Bolger family 28 , 29 , 30 , 37 , 39 , 49 , 1101 ; name 1113 ; names in 1135 
  Bolger , Adalbert 1101 , 1102 
  Bolger , Adalgar 1101 
  Bolger , Alfrida 1101 
  Bolger , Amethyst née Hornblower 1101 
  Bolger , Belba née Baggins 1100 , 1101 
  Bolger , Cora née Goodbody 1101 
  Bolger , Dina née Diggle 1101 
  Bolger , Fastolph 1100 , 1101 
  Bolger , Filibert 1100 , 1101 
  Bolger , Fredegar ‘ Fatty ’ 42 , 67 , 68 , 100–10 passim , 176 , 1021 , 1101 , 1102 , 1103 
  Bolger , Gerda née Boffin 1101 , 1102 
  Bolger , Gundabald 1101 , 1104 
  Bolger , Gundahad 1101 
  Bolger , Gundahar 1101 
  Bolger , Gundolpho 1101 
  Bolger , Heribald 1101 
  Bolger , Herugar 1101 , 1102 
  Bolger , Jessamine née Boffin 1101 , 1102 
  Bolger , Nina née Lightfoot 1101 
  Bolger , Nora 1101 
  Bolger , Odovacar 1101 , 1103 
  Bolger , Pansy née Baggins 1100 , 1101 
  Bolger , Poppy née Chubb - Baggins 1100 , 1101 
  Bolger , Prisca née Baggins 1100 , 1101 
  Bolger , Rosamunda née Took 1101 , 1103 
  Bolger , Rudibert 1101 
  Bolger , Rudigar 1100 , 1101 
  Bolger , Rudolph 1101 
  Bolger , Salvia née Brandybuck 1101 , 1104 
  Bolger , Theobald 1101 
  Bolger , Wilibald 1100 , 1101 
  Bolger , Wilimar 1101 
  Bombadil , Tom 119–37 passim , 142–8 passim , 152 , 163 , 179 , 214 , 265–6 , 472 , 719 , 996 , 1030 , 1091 ; Forn 265 ; Iarwain Ben - adar 265 , 266 ; 1114 ; Orald 265 ; Eldest ( oldest ) 131 , 265 ; house of ( under hill ) 119 , 121–2 , 123–5 , 137 , 142 , 1030 
  Bombur 229 , 1079 
  Bonfire Glade 110 , 111–12 
  Book of Mazarbul 321–3 , 356 , 1126 
  Books of Lore , at Rivendell 107 
  Borgil 81 
  Borin 1072 , 1079 
  Boromir , son of Denethor II ( Captain , High Warden of the White Tower , of the Nine Walkers , etc . ) 240 , 245 , 247 , 248–9 , 252 , 255 , 258 , 262 , 266 , 267–8 , 269 , 276 , 279–405 passim , 413–19 passim , 425 , 431 , 432 , 434 , 435 , 436 , 442 , 444 , 446 , 490 , 496 , 517 , 563 , 571 , 657–8 , 663–8 , 669 , 671 , 672 , 677 , 679 , 680–1 , 692 , 749 , 753 , 754–6 , 759 , 764 , 766 , 767 , 798 , 810–18 passim , 856 , 1053 , 1056 , 1090 , 1091 , 1092 ; name 1128 ; horn of see Horn of Boromir 
  Boromir , steward 1039 , 1053 , 1054 
  Bounders 10 , 45 
  Bracegirdle family 28 , 29 , 30 , 49 , 1021 
  Bracegirdle , Blanco 1102 
  Bracegirdle , Bruno 1102 
  Bracegirdle , Hugo 37 , 1102 
  Bracegirdle , Primrose née Boffin 1102 
  Brand , son of Bain , King of Dale 229 , 241–2 , 1078 , 1080 , 1090 , 1094 , 1095 
  Brandy Hall 7 , 14 , 15 , 23 , 92 , 93 , 98 , 100 , 1104 
  Brandybuck family 7 , 22 , 23 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 39 , 66 , 91 , 94 , 98 , 100 , 107 , 150 , 177 , 870 , 1104 ; name 1138 ; inquisitiveness of 591 ; Master of the Hall ( Master of Buckland ) , i.e. head of the family 4 , 8 , 98 , 107 
  Brandybuck , Adaldrida née Bolger 1101 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Amaranth 1104 
  Brandybuck , Berilac 1104 
  Brandybuck , Celandine 1104 
  Brandybuck , Dinodas 1104 
  Brandybuck , Doderic 1104 
  Brandybuck , Dodinas 1104 
  Brandybuck , Esmeralda née Took 31 , 1103 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Estella née Bolger 1101 , 1103 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Gorbadoc ‘ Broadbelt ’ 23 , 1103 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Gorbulas 1104 
  Brandybuck , Gormadoc ‘ Deepdelver ’ 1104 
  Brandybuck , Hanna née Goldworthy 1104 
  Brandybuck , Hilda née Bracegirdle 1102 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Ilberic 1104 
  Brandybuck , Madoc ‘ Proudneck ’ 1104 
  Brandybuck , Malva née Headstrong 1104 
  Brandybuck , Marmadas 1104 
  Brandybuck , Marmadoc ‘ Masterful ’ 1101 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Marroc 1104 
  Brandybuck , Melilot 29 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Menegilda née Goold 1104 
  Brandybuck , Mentha 1104 
  Brandybuck , Meriadoc ‘ Merry ’ , son of Saradoc 2 , 8 , 15 , 39 , 42–3 , 66–7 , 68 , 71 , 92 , 97–154 passim , 163 , 169 , 172–214 passim , 219 , 223–4 , 226 , 227 , 239 , 272–405 passim , 414–15 , 433 , 435 , 437–8 , 440–1 , 444 , 447–500 passim , 521 , 556–77 passim , 583–93 passim , 596 , 658 , 754 , 755 , 767 , 770 , 773–9 passim , 791–805 passim , 830–3 passim , 836–7 , 840–5 passim , 858–60 , 863 , 868–74 passim , 883–4 , 892 , 897 , 954 , 955 , 961 , 963 , 966 , 970 , 975 , 977 , 978 , 981–1027 passim , 1030–1 , 1033 , 1070 , 1091 , 1092 , 1096 , 1097 , 1098 , 1100 , 1101 , 1103 , 1104 , 1115 , 1137 ; Holdwine of the Mark 978 , 1070 , 1097 ; Meriadoc ‘ the Magnificent ’ 1070 , 1104 ; Master of Buckland 1070 , 1098 ; horn of see Horn of the Mark ; name 1135 
  Brandybuck , Merimac 1104 
  Brandybuck , Merimas 1104 
  Brandybuck , Mirabella née Took 1103 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Orgulas 1104 
  Brandybuck , Rorimac ‘ Goldfather ’ , ‘ Old Rory ’ 31 , 38 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Sadoc 1104 
  Brandybuck , Saradas 1104 
  Brandybuck , Saradoc ‘ Scattergold ’ 556 , 1103 , 1104 
  Brandybuck , Seredic 1104 
  Brandywine ( Baranduin ) 4 , 6 , 22 , 23 , 43 , 73 , 83 , 89 , 91 , 92 , 98–9 , 100 , 113 , 121 , 135 , 149 , 157 , 172 , 177 , 210 , 288 , 368 , 918 , 993 , 998 , 1013 , 1039–40 , 1086 , 1089 , 1099 , 1135 , 1137 ; name 1134 , 1137 , 1138 ; valley of 135 
  Brandywine Bridge ( Bridge of Stonebows , Great Bridge ) 4 , 5 , 24 , 67 , 71 , 88 , 99 , 107 , 108 , 137 , 150 , 996 , 998 , 1000 , 1001 , 1044 , 1096 , 1097 ; bridge - house 1000 , 1003 ; Bridge Inn 999 
  Bree ( Bree - land , Bree - Folk , Breelanders ) 4 , 8 , 15 , 148–69 passim , 172–80 passim , 182 , 183 , 185 , 187 , 221 , 232 , 248 , 256 , 257 , 261 , 263 , 264 , 280 , 327 , 562 , 566 , 870 , 986 , 991–5 passim , 1004 , 1005 , 1040 , 1077 , 1080 , 1086 , 1089 , 1091 , 1096 , 1109 ; calendar of 1107 , 1110 ; Gate - keeper 990 ; Hobbits of ( Little Folk ) 8 , 148–57 passim , 161 , 992 ; Men of ( Big Folk ) 148 , 149–56 passim ; language , dialect of 155 , 1130 ; names in 1134–5 ; place - names in 1130 ; South - gate of 150 , 173 , 181 , 989–90 ; West - gate of 150 , 151 , 173 , 174 , 995 ; ‘ strange as news from Bree ’ 647 
  Bree - hill 181 , 989 , 992 
  Bregalad see Quickbeam 
  Brego , son of Eorl 516 , 797–8 , 977 , 1068 , 1087 
  Bridgefields 108 
  Brockenbores 1021 
  Brockhouse family 28 , 29 , 30 ; name 155 
  Brown Lands 380 , 381 , 459 , 476 , 1064 
  Bruinen ( Loudwater ) 3 , 188 , 200 , 202 , 204 , 212 , 215 , 224 , 238 , 239 
  Bruinen , Ford of ( Ford of Rivendell ) 188 , 200 , 203 , 204 , 208 , 210 , 212–14 , 219 , 221 , 223 , 224 , 249 , 264 , 275 , 281 , 989 , 1039 , 1040 , 1041 , 1092 , 1096 
  Brytta see Léofa 
  Bucca of the Marish 1043 , 1087 
  Buck Hill 98 , 100 
  Buckland ( Bucklanders ) 6 , 9 , 22 , 23 , 66–7 , 69 , 70 , 76 , 83 , 92 , 93 , 95 , 98–100 , 107 , 150 , 151 , 172 , 176–7 , 263 , 998 , 1025 , 1031 , 1087 , 1097 , 1112 , 1138 ; names 1135 ; Gate of ( Buckland Gate , Hay Gate , North - gate ) 107 , 177 , 996 , 998 ; horn - call , horn - cry of 176–7 , 1007 ; Master of see Brandybuck family 
  Bucklebury 15 , 67 , 69 , 75 , 86 , 91 , 98 , 100 , 106 , 121 
  Bucklebury Ferry ( the Ferry ) 68 , 71 , 88–96 passim , 98–9 
  Budgeford 108 , 1101 
  Bullroarer see Took , Bandobras 
  Bumpkin 144 
  Bundushathûr ( Shathûr ) [ Cloudy - head ] see Fanuidhol 
  Burrows family 28 , 29 , 30 
  Burrows , Asphodel née Brandybuck 1104 
  Burrows , Milo 37 , 1100 , 1104 
  Burrows , Minto 1100 
  Burrows , Moro 1100 
  Burrows , Mosco 1100 
  Burrows , Myrtle 1100 
  Burrows , Peony née Baggins 1100 , 1104 
  Burrows , Rufus 1104 
  Butterbur family 8 
  Butterbur , Barliman ( Barley ) 148 , 150–73 passim , 177–80 passim , 221 , 248 , 258 , 261 , 263 , 986 , 990–5 passim 
  Bywater 22 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 40 , 44 , 71 , 362 , 934 , 1001–11 passim , 1015 , 1022 , 1023 , 1096 ; Pool at 939 , 1004 ; see also Battle of Bywater 
  Bywater Road 22 , 1015–16 
  Cair Andros ( Andros ) 812 , 816 , 819 , 821 , 883 , 886 , 957 , 963 , 964 , 1054 , 1093 
  Calacirya [ ravine of light ] 235 , 377 , 378 
  Calembel 790 , 1093 
  Calenardhon ( later Rohan ) 678 , 1039 , 1047 , 1053 , 1064 , 1087 
  Calendars 15 , 1106–12 
  Calenhad 747 , 805 
  Calimehtar , brother of Rómendacil II 1047 
  Calimehtar , son of Narmacil II 1038 , 1049 , 1086 
  Calimmacil 1050 
  Calmacil 1038 , 1045 
  Captain of the Haven at Umbar 1055 
  Captains of the West 878 , 881 , 886–91 passim , 928 , 931 , 935 , 938 , 942 , 948 , 949 , 957 , 958 , 960 
  Carach Angren see Isenmouthe 
  Caradhras the Cruel ( Barazinbar , Baraz , Redhorn ) 282–3 , 286–94 passim , 298 , 317 , 333 , 356 , 677 , 749 , 985 , 1071 , 1092 , 1113 ; pass of see Redhorn Gate 
  Caras Galadhon ( City of the Galadhrim , City of the Trees ) 350 , 351 , 353–5 , 357 , 361 , 371 , 388 , 472 , 503 , 1060 , 1092 , 1094 ; name 1127 
  Carchost see Towers of the Teeth 
  Cardolan 1039–41 
  Carl , son of Cottar 1105 
  Carn Dûm 143 , 146 , 1051 
  Carnen ( Redwater ) 1072 , 1095 
  Carnimírië 483 , 484 
  Carrock 1063 , 1129 ; Ford of 228 
  Castamir the Usurper 1038 , 1047 , 1048 , 1086 
  Causeway 750 , 807 , 883 ; Forts of ( Guard - towers ) 750 , 807 , 817 , 818 , 1093 
  Cave - troll 324 
  Celduin see River Running 
  Celebdil the White ( Silvertine , Zirakzigil , Zirak ) 282–3 , 285 , 333 , 502 , 949 , 985 , 1092 
  Celeborn the Wise ( Lord of Lothlórien , Lord of the Galadhrim , etc . ) 15–16 , 347 , 348 , 350 , 353–61 passim , 367 , 368 , 372–7 passim , 442 , 467 , 972 , 976 , 979 , 981 , 982 , 985 , 1063 , 1082 , 1085 , 1094 , 1095 , 1096 ; one of the Great Ones 979 
  Celebrant , river ( Silverlode , Kibil - nâla ) [ silver - course ] 274 , 283 , 322 , 334–5 , 338 , 341 , 346–7 , 350 , 356 , 371–2 , 377 , 383 , 388 , 1064 , 1073 
  Celebrant , Field of [ plain between Silverlode and Limlight ] 1045 , 1064 ; see also Battle of the Field of Celebrant 
  Celebrían 227 , 375 , 1043 , 1085 , 1087 
  Celebrimbor 242 , 253 , 306 , 1083 
  Celebrindor 1038 
  Celepharn 1038 
  Celos 875 
  Cemendur 1038 
  Ceorl 527 
  Cerin Amroth 350–2 , 1060 , 1062 , 1063 , 1090 
  Certar see Cirth 
  Certhas Daeron see Daeron ’s Runes 
  Chamber of Mazarbul [ Records ] 319–25 passim , 356 
  Chambers of Fire see Sammath Naur 
  Chetwood 4 , 149 , 182 , 185 , 989 ; name 1135 
  Chief , the see Sackville - Baggins , Lotho 
  Chief ’s Men see Ruffians 
  Chubb family 28 , 29 , 30 
  Chubb - Baggins , Falco 1100 
  Círdan the Shipwright 240 , 243 , 266 , 1030 , 1039–42 passim , 1085 
  Ciril 790 , 875 ; fords of 790 
  Cirion 678 , 1039 , 1053 , 1064 , 1071 
  Cirith Gorgor ( Haunted Pass ) 373 , 636 , 639 , 886 , 887 , 891 , 924 , 933 
  Cirith Ungol [ Pass of the Spider ] ( High Pass , Nameless Pass ) 642–4 passim , 691 , 692–3 , 710 , 711 , 723 , 735 , 812 , 815 , 943 , 955 , 1051 , 1093 ; Cleft of 723 , 733–4 , 898 ; tower of 710 , 713 , 725 , 733 , 736 , 742 , 897–916 passim , 920 , 922 , 925 , 927 , 1093 ; see also Straight Stair ; Winding Stair 
  Cirth see Runes 
  Ciryandil 1038 , 1045 , 1085 
  Citadel of Gondor ( High City ) 751 , 752–3 , 760 , 761 , 762 , 764 , 767 , 771 , 772 , 807 , 808 , 810 , 814 , 819 , 820 , 821 , 824 , 825 , 827 , 850 , 851 , 857 , 858 , 859 , 861 , 868 , 958 , 965 , 968 , 972 , 1048 ; Citadel - gate 752 , 810 , 826 , 827 , 851 , 855 ; Court ( Place ) of the Fountain 752 , 753 , 758 , 971 , 972 ; Guards of see Guards of the Citadel ; Hall of the Kings ( of the Tower , Tower Hall ) 248 , 754 , 806 , 818 , 861 , 968 ; High Court 752 ; see also White Tower 
  Citadel of the Stars see Osgiliath 
  City , the see usually Minas Tirith 
  City of the Galadhrim ( City of the Trees ) see Caras Galadhon 
  Closed Door see Fen Hollen 
  Cloudyhead see Fanuidhol 
  Coldfells 1057 
  Combe 149 , 151 , 180 , 181 ; name 1135 
  Command , word of 327 
  Common Speech ( Common Language , Common Tongue , Westron , etc . ) 4 , 50 , 193 , 339 , 343 , 354–5 , 359 , 432 , 445 , 499 , 508 , 510 , 659 , 768 , 832 , 924–6 , 954 , 1109–14 passim , 1117 , 1120 , 1126–37 passim ; names in 1134 
  Company of the Ring ( Ring ’s Company ) 275 , 276 , 279–359 passim , 367–74 passim , 377–96 passim , 401 , 402 , 404 , 414 , 415 , 419 , 435 , 436 , 495 , 496 , 497 , 569 , 603 , 604 , 609 , 663 , 664 , 668 , 669 , 677 , 732 , 759 , 760 , 773 , 955 , 1092 ; Companions of the Ring ( Companions ) 970 , 974 , 975 ; Fellowship 14 , 396 , 668 , 670 , 970 , 1030 , 1092 ; Fellowship of the Ring 981 , 1096 , 1098 ; Nine Companions 872 Nine Walkers 275–6 , 672 , 1053 , 1080 
  Cormallen , Field of 951–7 passim , 964 , 1005 , 1095 
  Corsairs of Umbar 765 , 780 , 846 , 1047 , 1048 , 1053 , 1055 , 1066 , 1086 , 1088 
  Cotman , son of Cottar 1105 
  Cotman family 1138 
  Cottar , ancestor of Cottons 1105 
  Cotton family 1024 ; name 1138 
  Cotton , Bowman ‘ Nick ’ 934 , 1007 , 1105 
  Cotton , Carl ‘ Nibs ’ 934 , 939 , 1008 , 1105 
  Cotton , Holman ‘ Long Hom ’ 1105 
  Cotton , Lily née Brown 1008 , 1105 
  Cotton , Marigold née Gamgee 1105 
  Cotton , Rose ‘ Rosie ’ ( later Rose Gamgee ) 934 , 939 , 1008 , 1014 , 1024 , 1026 , 1029 , 1031 , 1096 , 1097 , 1105 
  Cotton , Tolman ‘ Tom ’ , the elder 934 , 939 , 1006–16 passim , 1105 
  Cotton , Tolman ‘ Tom ’ , the younger 1007 , 1013 , 1097 , 1105 
  Cotton , Wilcome ‘ Jolly ’ 934 , 939 , 1007 , 1012 , 1105 
  Cotton , Wilcome ‘ Will ’ 1105 
  Council , of Denethor 816 
  Council of Elrond ( the Council ) 13 , 220 , 238 , 239–71 , 272 , 281 , 369 , 396 , 398 , 399 , 472 , 663 , 664 , 671 , 732 , 735 , 1092 
  Council of the Wise see White Council 
  Court of the Fountain see Citadel of Gondor 
  Crack(s ) of Doom ( Fire of Doom , the Fire , gulf of Doom ) 61 , 62 , 66 , 267 , 269 , 402 , 403 , 624 , 652 , 682 , 732 , 939 , 944 , 945–6 , 950 , 1094 ; see also Sammath Naur 
  Cram 369 
  Crebain 285 ; see also Birds , as spies 
  Crickhollow 67 , 68 , 87 , 100–2 , 107 , 108 , 109 , 118 , 176 , 177 , 263 , 264 , 1000 , 1024 , 1025 , 1091 
  Cross - roads ( of the Fallen King ) 641 , 648 , 699 , 701–3 , 808 , 883–6 passim , 897 , 935 , 1093 
  Crown of Gondor ( Silver Crown , White Crown , winged crown , crown of Elendil ) 244 , 423 , 671 , 967–8 , 1043 , 1052 , 1062 
  Crows see Birds , as spies 
  Curtain , the see Henneth Annûn 
  Curunír see Saruman 
  Daeron 191 , 1118 
  Daeron ’s Runes ( Certhas Daeron ) 320 , 1118 , 1123 , 1126 
  Dagorlad ( Battle Plain ) 604 , 625 , 671 , 799 , 1049 , 1086 ; see also Battle of Dagorlad 
  Dáin I 1072 , 1079 , 1087 
  Dáin II ‘ Ironfoot ’ 229 , 241–2 , 343 , 881 , 1075–6 , 1078 , 1080 , 1088 , 1089 , 1094 , 1095 
  Dale 11 , 27 , 29 , 57 , 228 , 229 , 231 , 241 , 321 , 369 , 431 , 1072 , 1078 , 1080 , 1089 , 1090 , 1094 , 1095 , 1118 , 1129 , 1135 ; calendar of 1110 ; language of 1130 , 1136 ; Men of ( Bardings ) 229 , 369 , 431 , 1129 ; see also Battle of Dale ; Battle of Five Armies 
  Damrod 659 , 660 , 661 , 668 , 669 , 672 , 673 
  Dark Days 343 
  Dark Door see Door of the Dead 
  Dark Lord see Sauron 
  Dark Power see Sauron 
  Dark Power ( of the North ) see Morgoth 
  Dark Tower see Barad - dûr 
  Dark Years 430 , 723 , 750 , 782 , 795 , 797 , 831 , 876 , 1071 , 1129 , 1131 
  Darkness ( of Mordor , of the Storm of Mordor ) 251 , 677 , 698–700 , 772 , 790 , 800 , 801 , 803 , 808 , 812 , 817 , 833 , 851 , 874 , 976 , 1093 ; Darkness Unescapable 962 ; Dawnless Day 1093 
  Days of Dearth 5 
  Dead , the ( Dead Men of Dunharrow , forgotten people , Grey Host , Shadow Host , Sleepless Dead , etc . ) 503 , 781 , 782 , 787–90 , 797 , 798 , 874–7 , 1129 ; King of 789 , 790 , 875 , 876–7 ; Men of the Mountains 782 ; Oathbreakers 781 , 789 ; see also Door of the Dead ; Paths of the Dead 
  Dead City see Minas Morgul 
  Dead Marshes 253 , 373 , 603 , 609 , 611 , 619 , 620 , 625–31 , 635 , 643 , 667 , 687 , 700 , 886 , 1049 , 1086 , 1090 , 1093 ; Mere of Dead Faces 627–8 , 631 
  Deadmen ’s Dike see Fornost 
  Déagol 53 , 55 , 56 , 1087 ; name 1130 , 1136 
  Death Down 553 , 777 
  Deeping Wall ( the Wall ) 528–39 passim 
  Deeping - coomb ( the Coomb ) 529 , 530 , 534 , 541 , 546 , 548 , 549 , 550 , 553 , 597 , 600 , 775 , 777 , 779 , 782 , 978 , 1066 
  Deeping - stream 528 , 536 , 537 , 543 , 546 
  Denethor I 1039 , 1053 
  Denethor II , son of Ecthelion II ( Lord and Steward of Gondor , Minas Tirith , the City , the Tower of Guard , the White Tower , Steward of the High King , etc . ) 246 , 248 , 252 , 253 , 402 , 414 , 417 , 434 , 510 , 600 , 658 , 659 , 665 , 666 , 668 , 670 , 671 , 678 , 690 , 749 , 751 , 753–67 passim , 771 , 772 , 798–9 , 804–27 passim , 835 , 850 , 851 , 852–6 , 861 , 862 , 864 , 870 , 878 , 892 , 897 , 958 , 1039 , 1053 , 1055–7 , 1089 , 1090 , 1093 , 1116 , 1133 ; name 1128 
  Déor 977 , 1068 
  Déorwine 844 , 849 
  Derndingle 478 , 484 
  Dernhelm see Éowyn 
  Derufin 770 , 849 
  Dervorin 770 
  Desolation of Smaug 229 
  Desolation of the Morannon 1093 
  Dimholt 786 , 795 , 797 
  Dimrill Dale ( Azanulbizar , Nanduhirion ) 283 , 310 , 318 , 321 , 322 , 331 , 341 , 370 , 1054 , 1071–6 passim ; see also Battle of Nanduhirion 
  Dimrill Gate see Moria 
  Dimrill Stair 283 , 333 , 343 , 985 
  Dior , steward 1039 
  Dior , Thingol ’s heir 194 , 243 , 1034 
  Dírhael 1057 
  Dís 1072 , 1076 , 1079 , 1080 
  Dol Amroth 750 , 788 , 878 , 965 , 1056 , 1059 , 1129 ; banner of 771 , 820 , 821 , 843 , 871 , 891 , 953 ; men of 891 , 892 ; swan - knights of 820 , 821 , 828 , 848 , 882 ; silver swan , emblem 843 , 891 ; white ship and silver swan , emblems 771 ; [ combined as ship with swanshaped prow ] 871 , 953 ; see also Adrahil ; Finduilas ; Imrahil , Prince of Dol Amroth ; Lothíriel 
  Dol Baran 589 , 982 , 1093 
  Dol Guldur 250 , 256 , 257 , 268 , 296 , 352 , 644 , 723 , 1053 , 1064 , 1077 , 1078 , 1085 , 1087 , 1088 , 1089 , 1094 , 1095 
  Dome of Stars see Osgiliath 
  Dominion of Deadmen 971 , 1082 
  Doom , Mount see Mount Doom 
  Doom of Deadmen see Gift of Deadmen 
  Door of the Dead ( Dark Door , Door to the Paths of the Dead , Door , Forbidden Door ) 781 , 785 , 786 , 797 , 1087 ; see also Dead , the ; Paths of the Dead 
  Dori 229 , 1079 
  Doriath ( Kingdom of Thingol ) 193 , 243 , 723 , 1034 , 1118 , 1128 ; Elvenhome 192 
  Dorthonion ( Orod - na - Thôn ) 469 
  Downlands see Barrow - downs 
  Downs ( in Rohan ) 427–31 passim , 437 , 447 , 969 
  Dragons 24 , 44 , 51 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 87 , 81 , 104 , 303 , 358 , 359 , 738 , 747 , 1065 , 1072 , 1084 , 1087 ; see also Ancalagon the Black ; Scatha the Worm ; Smaug 
  Drúadan Forest 830 , 831 , 832 , 976 , 1093 , 1127 , 1129 
  Drums , in Moria 322–32 passim ; of the Wild Men ( Woses ) 830 , 831 , 835 , 976 
  Duilin 770 , 849 
  Duinhir 770 
  Dúnedain ( Deadmen of the West ) in Second Age and Third Age 1128–30 ; in Third Age : of Arnor ( of the North , Rangers ) , excluding those who joined Aragorn in the South 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 149 , 151 , 156 , 182 , 187 , 189 , 190 , 221 , 227 , 246 , 248 , 251 , 272 , 274 , 533 , 597 , 756 , 967 , 993 , 1039–44 passim , 1057 , 1089 , 1090 , 1091 ; those of the North who joined Aragorn in the South 503 , 775–90 passim , 844 , 848 , 876 , 882 , 883 , 891 , 948 , 966 , 1093 ; Chieftains of the Dúnedain 1043 ; Dúnedain of Cardolan 1040 , 1041 ; Dúnedain of Gondor ( of the South , of Ithilien , Rangers ) 656 , 657 , 659 , 660 , 663 , 665 , 668 , 672 , 674–6 , 681 , 688 , 729 , 795 , 1044–50 passim ; calendar of see King Reckoning ; see also Númenóreans ; Star of the Dúnedain 
  Dunharrow ( Hold ) 518 , 523 , 539 , 589 , 777 , 779 , 782 , 783 , 786 , 788 , 792–803 passim , 831 , 841 , 867 , 870 , 874 , 877 , 878 , 1067 , 1069 , 1093 , 1117 , 1129 ; name 1136 ; Stair of the Hold 797 
  Dunharrow , Dead Deadmen of see Dead , the 
  Dúnhere 793 , 796 , 849 
  Dunland 3 , 265 , 285 , 527 , 533 , 968 , 982 , 984 , 1066 , 1073 , 1076 , 1085 , 1086 , 1127 ; language of 536–7 , 1130 ; men of see Dunlendings ; name 1130 ; Dunland fells 533 
  Dunlendings ( Deadmen of Dunland , Dunlendish people , wild hillmen and herdfolk ) 527 , 529 , 533 , 534 , 535 , 536 , 540 , 542 , 545 , 777 , 982 , 1066–9 passim , 1127 , 1129 ; name 1130 
  Durin I , ‘ the Deathless ’ 315–17 , 547 , 1071 , 1074 , 1079 ; emblem of [ seven stars above a crown and anvil , had eight rays , represented the Plough ] 304 , 847 ; heirs , House of 1071 , 1076 , 1077 , 1079 , 1083 
  Durin III 1076 ; Doors of see Moria 
  Durin VI 1071–2 , 1079 , 1087 
  Durin VII & Last 1079 
  Durin ’s Axe 322 
  Durin ’s Bane see Balrog 
  Durin ’s Bridge see Moria 
  Durin ’s Crown 316 , 334 
  Durin ’s Day 316 , 350 
  Durin ’s Folk , race see Dwarves 
  Durin ’s Stone 334 
  Durin ’s Tower 502 
  Durthang 928 , 932 , 1094 
  Dwalin 229 , 1077 , 1079 
  Dwarrowdelf see Moria 
  Dwarves 1 , 2 , 3 , 7 , 8 , 11 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 35 , 43 , 54 , 61 , 149 , 151 , 153 , 154 , 155 , 161 , 190 , 228 , 229 , 231 , 255 , 270 , 275 , 283 , 292 , 296–7 , 303 , 304 , 315 , 317 , 320 , 329 , 341 , 343 , 347 , 356 , 359 , 376 , 379 , 420 , 429 , 438 , 464 , 501 , 524 , 534 , 535 , 547 , 616 , 670 , 728 , 876 , 978 , 1039 , 1064 , 1065 , 1071–88 passim , 1132–3 , 1137 ; Durin ’s Folk ( people , children , race ) 240 , 316 , 355 , 501 , 548 , 1033 , 1071–80 , 1087 ; Khazâd 534 , 535 ; Longbeards 1071 ; Naugrim 1137 ; Seven Fathers of 1071 ; in The Hobbit 11 , 13 , 40 , 206 , 208 , 228 ; dwarf - doors , gates 304 , 306 ; Dwarf - kings , lords , sires 50 , 51 , 241 , see also names of individual kings , e.g. Durin ; dwarves vs. dwarfs 1136 ; language of ( Dwarvish , Khuzdul ) 285 , 307 , 320 , 535 , 1114 , 1126 , 1132–4 ; names 1117 , 1133 , 1136 , 1137 ; relationship with Elves 255 , 303 ; writing 117–18 , 1124–6 
  Dwarves of Erebor ( Folk of , or under the Mountain ) 229 , 240 , 968 , 1072 , 1079 , 1095 , 1126 ; see also Erebor 
  Dwarves of Moria 240 , 321 , 1079 , 1126 ; see also Moria 
  Dwarves of the Iron Hills 1078 
  Dwarvish see Dwarves : language of 
  Dwimmerlaik [ in Rohan , work of necromancy , spectre ; cf . dwimmercrafty 437 ] 841 
  Dwimorberg , the Haunted Mountain 785 , 786 , 794–7 passim ; see also Door of the Dead ; Paths of the Dead 
  Dwimordene see Lothlórien 
  Eagles 261 , 274 , 296 , 385 , 423 , 495 , 893 , 948 , 963 ; see also Gwaihir the Windlord ; Landroval ; Meneldor 
  Eärendil , king of Gondor 1038 
  Eärendil the Mariner 194 , 233–6 , 237 , 243 , 712 , 720 , 1034 ; the star 361 , 365 , 376 , 1034 , 1035 ; the Flammifer of Westernesse 236 
  Eärendur 1038 , 1039 , 1085 
  Eärnil I 1038 , 1044 , 1045 , 1085 
  Eärnil II 1039 , 1049 , 1050 , 1051 , 1052 , 1056 , 1063 , 1086 
  Eärnur 670 , 678 , 967 , 1039 , 1050–2 , 1056 , 1070 , 1086 , 1087 
  East , far ( Eastlands ) 639 , 765 
  East Dales , of Rohan 545 
  East - gate , of Moria see Moria 
  East Lórien 1094 
  East March , of the Shire 9 
  East Wall see Emyn Muil 
  East - West Road ( East Road , Old Road , the Road , etc . ) 43 , 66 , 67 , 71 , 84 , 107 , 109 , 113 , 114 , 133 , 136 , 137 , 138 , 146–52 passim , 163 , 172 , 173 , 180 , 181–213 passim , 231 , 264 , 281 , 996 , 1000 , 1001 , 1015 , 1031 ; Great Road 1039 , 1040 
  Eastemnet 427 , 505 
  Easterlings ( folk of the East ) 245 , 400–1 , 678 , 846 , 848 , 883 , 885 , 891 , 949 , 957 , 968 , 1044 , 1045 , 1046 , 1049 , 1068 , 1085 , 1087 , 1095 
  Eastfarthing 6 , 9 , 71 , 88 , 108 , 150 , 213 , 1110 
  Eastfold 801 , 1092 
  Ecthelion I 1039 , 1088 , 1116 
  Ecthelion II ( Windlord of Gondor ) 1039 , 1055 , 1060 , 1090 ; see also Denethor II , son of Ecthelion II 
  Dúnedain ( Atani , Fathers of the Númenóreans ) 678 , 679 , 1034–5 , 1045 , 1083 , 1117 , 1128–9 ; Three Houses of Men ( of Elf - friends ) 678 ; First House of 1034 ; Third House of 1034 ; forefathers of 1041 ; unions of Eldar and Dúnedain 1034 ; see also Númenóreans 
  Edoras 261 , 439 , 500 , 505–8 passim , 511 , 520 , 522 , 523 , 526 , 527 , 539 , 544 , 549 , 551 , 556 , 589 , 600 , 747 , 773 , 777 , 778 , 782 , 791 , 792 , 793 , 802 , 803 , 804 , 817 , 976 , 978 , 979 , 1064–70 passim , 1088 , 1091–5 passim , 1098 ; name 1136 ; see also Meduseld 
  Egalmoth 1039 
  Eilenach 747 , 830 ; name 1129 
  Elanor , flower 350 , 351 , 352 , 371 , 373 , 1026 , 1060 , 1063 
  Elbereth ( Gilthoniel ) 79 , 84 , 195 , 198 , 214 , 236 , 238 , 378 , 387 , 729 , 912 , 913 , 915 , 1028 ; Varda , the Kindler , the Queen of Stars 377 , 378 [ Elbereth , star - queen ; Queen of the Stars ( Elentári ) ; Gilthoniel (= Tintallë ) , star - kindler : title only found following Muil name ; called ( in Quenya ) Varda , the exalted ] 
  Eldacar , of Elanor 1038 
  Eldacar , of Gondor ( Vinitharya ) 1038 , 1046 , 1047 , 1048 , 1064 , 1086 
  Eldamar ( Ever - eve , Evereven ) 235 , 236 , 372 , 597 , 1128 
  Eldar ( High Elves , of the High Kindred , West - elves ) , unless specifically or clearly Noldor 7 , 79 , 222 , 304 , 348 , 1029 , 1033–9 passim , 1058 , 1059 , 1063 , 1065 , 1071 , 1081–5 passim , 1107 , 1109 , 1110 , 1111 , 1114 , 1115 , 1117–18 , 1127–31 passim , 1134 , 1137–8 ; People of the Great Journey 1137 ; People of the Stars 1137 ; Noldor ( Elves of the West , the Elven - wise , Lords of the Eldar , Exiles ) [ followers of Fëanor ] 80 , 193 , 222 , 283–4 , 597 , 1034 , 1082 , 1083 , 1117 , 1118 , 1123 , 1126 , 1128 , 1137 ; kings of 1082 , see also Elves of Eregion ; Sindar ( Grey - elves ) 1082 , 1083 , 1117 , 1128 , 1137 ; tree , as emblem 304 , 305 ; unions of Eldar and Dúnedain 1034 ; Eldar and ‘ twilight ’ 1111 
  Eldarin languages see Elvish languages 
  Eldarion 1062 , 1063 
  Elder Days 2 , 15 , 16 , 149 , 191 , 236 , 243 , 259 , 275 , 306 , 310 , 319 , 349 , 350 , 356 , 442 , 500 , 678 , 1039 , 1058 , 1062 , 1071 , 1082 , 1127 , 1131 , 1132 , 1137 
  Elder Kindred , People , Race see Elves 
  Elder King ( Manwë ) 235 
  Eldest of Trees see Telperion 
  Elendil [ elf - friend or star - lover ] of Westernesse ( the tall ) 9 , 15 , 52 , 56 , 185 , 201 , 242–8 passim , 252 , 368 , 375 , 393 , 433 , 436 , 437 , 510 , 511 , 594 , 597 , 599 , 641 , 663 , 664 , 678 , 753 , 964 , 967 , 1036–9 passim , 1042 , 1045 , 1047 , 1049 , 1050 , 1059 , 1061 , 1084 , 1129 ; crown of see Crown of Gondor ; Elendil ’s Stone see Palantír ; emblems of [ Seven Stars of Elendil and Palantír captains , had five rays , originally represented the single stars on the banners of each of seven ships ( of 9 ) that bore a palantír ; in Gondor the seven stars were set about a white - flowered tree , over which the Kings set a winged crown ] 276 , 597 , 753 , 847 , 861 , 953 , 968 , 1053 ; heirs , House , line of 201 , 247 , 375 , 670 , 861 , 972 , see also Aragorn II ; livery of the heirs of 753 ; name 1128 ; name used as battle - cry 331 , 413 , 537 ; realms of 1050 ; star of see Elendilmir ; sword of see Narsil 
  Elendilmir ( Star of Elendil , Star of the North Kingdom , Star of the North ) [ of diamond , had five rays , represented the Star of Eärendil ] 146 , 848 , 861 , 966 , 967 , 1043 
  Elendur 1038 
  Elenna , Isle of see Númenor 
  Elessar ( Aragorn ) see Aragorn II 
  Elessar ( Elfstone , jewel ) 234 , 237 , 375 , 862 , 863 , 889 , 966 , 982 
  Elf - country see Lothlórien 
  Elf - friend , epithet applied to Aragorn 343 ; Beren 271 ; Elendil 191 ; Frodo 81 , 85 , 124 , 270 ; Hador 271 , 678 ; Húrin 271 ; Túrin 271 ; Elf - friends of Númenor 1129 ; Three Houses of the Elf - friends 1128 
  Elf - kin , lords , magic , etc . see Elves 
  Elf - towers see White Towers 
  Elfhelm 551 , 830 , 831 , 835 , 836 , 837 , 839 , 882 , 966 
  Elfhild 1070 
  Elfstone see Aragorn II ; Elessar ( jewel ) 
  Elfwine the Fair 1070 
  Elladan , son of Elrond 15 , 227 , 233 , 273 , 274 , 775 , 776 , 778 , 781 , 782 , 786 , 788 , 848 , 861 , 871 , 878 , 882 , 883 , 888 , 891 , 954 , 970 , 972 , 976 , 978 , 1035 , 1043 , 1057 , 1058 , 1085 , 1094 , 1095 
  Elrohir , son of Elrond 15 , 227 , 233 , 273 , 274 , 775 , 776 , 778 , 781 , 782 , 789 , 848 , 861 , 871 , 878 , 880 , 882 , 883 , 888 , 891 , 954 , 970 , 972 , 976 , 978 , 1035 , 1043 , 1057 , 1058 , 1085 , 1094 , 1095 
  Elrond the Halfelven ( Lord of Rivendell ) 15 , 66 , 170 , 191 , 194 , 202 , 210 , 219–81 passim , 290 , 298 , 303 , 343 , 355 , 363 , 365 , 369 , 378 , 398 , 402 , 441 , 442 , 444 , 472 , 567 , 598 , 652 , 664 , 679 , 694 , 708 , 729 , 735 , 775 , 778 , 781 , 782 , 847 , 859 , 861 , 863 , 871 , 878 , 880 , 882 , 883 , 888 , 891 , 954 , 970 , 972 , 974 , 976 , 978 , 985 , 986 , 988 , 1028 , 1029 , 1033 , 1034 , 1035 , 1042 , 1043 , 1057–62 passim , 1082 , 1083 , 1085 , 1086 , 1089 , 1090 , 1094 , 1095 , 1096 , 1112 ; Council of see Council of Elrond ; house of see Rivendell ; household of 240 , 281 , 276 , 972 , 974 , 988 ; sons of see Elladan ; Elrohir 
  Elros Tar - Minyatur 1034 , 1035 , 1083 
  Elven Door see Moria 
  Elven - cloaks , folk , etc . see Elves 
  Elven - king ’s halls , Mirkwood 255 , 547 
  Elven - rings see Rings of Power 
  Elven - river see Esgalduin 
  Elven - smiths , in First Age 310 ; of Eregion 47 , 242 , 254 , 1076 , 1083 ; at Rivendell 276 , 277 
  Elven - tongue(s ) see Elvish languages 
  Elven - way , from Hollin 300 , 301 , 303 
  Elvendom [ Elvish world , mode of being ] 352 
  Elvenhome 235 , 676 , 679 , 956 , 1058 ; see also Doriath 
  Elves ( Firstborn , Elder Kindred , Elder People , Elder Race , Elvish or Halfelven folk , kin , etc . ) 2–7 passim , 24 , 43 , 45 , 52 , 54 , 59 , 63 , 64 , 66 , 73 , 78–87 passim , 90 , 105 , 106 , 131 , 132 , 145 , 149 , 172 , 186 , 190–1 , 193 , 200 , 209 , 221–7 passim , 235 , 238 , 243 , 244 , 246 , 255 , 259 , 266–72 passim , 275 , 281 , 283 , 291 , 292 , 297 , 303 , 317 , 338 , 341 , 346–9 , 353–60 passim , 365 , 369–73 passim , 376 , 383 , 398 , 400 , 420 , 432 , 438 , 442 , 459 , 464 , 465 , 468 , 472 , 473 , 475 , 476 , 486 , 499 , 511 , 513 , 547 , 570 , 613 , 616 , 617 , 628 , 652 , 657 , 670 , 673 , 677 , 679 , 680 , 686 , 692 , 720 , 721 , 723 , 728 , 729 , 873 , 906 , 911 , 912 , 915 , 933 , 936 , 971 , 982 , 987 , 1030 , 1034 , 1040 , 1042 , 1050 , 1084 , 1091 , 1094 , 1137 ; Elves as name of Quendi 1137 ; Fair Folk 45 , 66 , 80 , 874 ; boats of 371–3 , 377–95 passim , 405–6 , 416–19 passim , 666 , 667 ; brooches made by 370 , 424 , 437 , 450 , 458 , 564 , 666 , 889 , 918 , 1025 ; cloaks , robes of 370 , 371 , 386 , 416 , 424 , 427 , 438 , 457 , 489 , 493 , 513 , 556 , 625 , 644 , 666 , 707 , 725 , 731 , 807 , 862 , 889 , 912 , 913 , 918 , 933 , 937 , 938 , 954 , 1025 , 1094 ; calendar of 1107–12 passim ; Elf - kings 50 , 191 ; Elf - lords 51 , 194 , 268 ; Elf - minstrels 230 , 1058 ; languages of see Elvish languages ; Elven - lore 50 , 679 ; Elf - magic 361 , 362 , 363 ; and memory 378–9 ; and moonlight , sunlight 351 ; names 1127 , 1128 ; New Year 1112 ; relationship with Dwarves 255 , 303 ; riding elf - fashion 439 , 596 ; rope made by 371 , 608–11 , 617–18 , 938 ; sea - longing of 873 ; seasons of 1107 ; Elvish sight 427 , 430 , 526 ; Elvish sleep and dreams 429 ; ability to run over snow 292 ; Elvensong 238 , 377 ; experience of time 388 , 1107 ; Wandering Companies 84–5 ; writing see Elvish writing ; see also Eldar ( High Elves ) ; Elves of Eregion ; Elves of Lothló rien ; Elves of Mirkwood ; Silvan Elves ( Wood - elves ) ; Last Alliance of Elves and Men 
  Elves of Eregion 282 , 283–4 , 303 , 1082 , 1083 , 1126 ; see also Elven - smiths 
  Elves of Lothlórien 341 , 377 ; Galadhrim ( Tree - people ) 341 , 350 , 351 , 353 , 356 , 357 , 359 , 370 , 374 , 375 , 376 ; Silvan Elves of Lothlórien 1087 ; City of the Galadhrim see Caras Galadhon 
  Elves of Mirkwood ( Northern Elves , Folk of the Mirkwood ) 253 , 255 , 272–3 , 339 , 342 , 355 , 968 
  Elvish country see Lindon ; Lothlórien 
  Elvish languages ( Halfelven , Elvish language , speech , tongue ) , general or unspecified and uncertain 15 , 82 , 307 , 465 , 477 , 478 , 486 , 1114 , 1118 , 1127–8 , 1129 , 1134 , 1135 ; Eldarin languages ( Quenya and Sindarin ) 1036 , 1113–18 passim , 1121 , 1127–8 , 1131 , 1137 ; Silvan ( woodland ) tongue , accent 339 , 342 , 1127 ; see also Quenya ( High - elven ) ; Sindarin ( Grey - elven ) ; Valinorean 
  Elvish writing ( lettering , script ) 50 , 253 , 306 , 321 , 322 ; Fëanorian letters ( script ) 1116 , 1118 , 1120 , 1122 , 1126 ; mode of Beleriand 305 ; see also Runes ; Tengwar 
  Elwing the White 194 , 234 , 243 , 1034 
  Emyn Arnen 750 , 969 
  Emyn Beraid see Tower Hills 
  Emyn Muil 373 , 380 , 385 , 389 , 390 , 392 , 402 , 407 , 421 , 423–4 , 427 , 428 , 495 , 497 , 500 , 506 , 563 , 603–19 , 650 , 669 , 724 , 759 , 886 , 944 , 971 , 1046 , 1049 , 1070 , 1092 ; East Wall of Rohan [ the western cliffs of Emyn Muil ] 432 , 437 
  Emyn Uial see Evendim , Hills of 
  Encircling Mountains 948 
  End , the 251 
  Endless Stair 502 
  Enedwaith 1089 
  Enemy , the see Morgoth ; Sauron 
  Ent - draughts 471 , 478 , 561–2 , 574 , 956 , 981 
  Ent - house(s ) 471 , 482 , 483 , 484 
  Entish see Ents : language of 
  Entmoot ( Entmoot ) 478 , 481–5 , 564 , 1092 , 1093 
  Ents 442 , 464 , 465 , 468 , 472–87 passim , 499–500 , 544 , 549 , 558 , 561–74 passim , 577 , 582 , 585–8 passim , 955 , 978–81 passim , 996 , 1093 , 1130–1 ; Onodrim ( Enyd ) 442 , 499 , 1130 ; shepherds of the trees 468 , 499 , 549 ; Entings 475 , 478 , 981 ; Entmaidens 475 ; Entwives 472 , 475 , 476 , 483 , 486 , 586 , 982 ; language of ( Entish ) 465 , 473 , 477 , 478 , 480 , 486 , 1130–1 ; remembered in song or tales for children 476 , 477–8 , 499 , 549–50 ; Shadow of the Mirkwood 580 
  Entwade 435 , 439 
  Entwash 373 , 421 , 427–30 passim , 436 , 450 , 456 , 458 , 468–71 passim , 490 , 505 , 507 , 569 , 667 , 804 , 1067 ; vale of 389 , 424 
  Entwood see Fangorn Forest 
  Éomer , son of Éomund ( Éomer Éadig , Third Marshal of Riddermark or the Riddermark , later King Éomer , King of the Riddermark ) 432–9 passim , 443 , 459 , 509 , 513–38 passim , 543 , 544 , 550 , 551 , 556 , 577 , 579–80 , 595 , 774 , 777–8 , 779 , 785 , 792 , 795–8 passim , 801 , 802 , 804 , 807 , 830–8 passim , 843–9 passim , 856 , 861 , 862 , 863 , 866 , 867 , 868 , 873 , 879–82 passim , 888 , 955 , 960 , 964 , 965 , 966 , 969 , 974–8 passim , 1070–1 , 1090 , 1092 , 1095 , 1097 , 1098 
  Éomund 438 , 1070 ; see also Éomer , son of Éomund ; Éowyn , daughter of Éomund 
  Éored [ a troop of Riders of Rohan ] 435 , 437 , 830 , 836 , 837 , 838 , 975 
  Eorl the Young ( lord of the Men of the éothéod , King of the Riddermark ) 431 , 435 , 436 , 508 , 512 , 516 , 537 , 549 , 969 , 976 , 977 , 978 , 1053 , 1063–5 , 1068 , 1071 , 1087 ; House of [ dynasty ] 519 , 522 , 523 , 579 , 580 , 784 , 785 , 797 , 868 ; house of [ hall ] 600 ; house of [ both ] , i.e. hall and dynasty 581 , 867 ; lords of the House of see Théoden : household of ; Oath of 1053 , 1054 , 1071 ; Sons of Eorl ( Eorlingas ) see Rohirrim 
  Éothain 434–5 , 439 
  Éothéod 1063 , 1065 , 1087 
  Éowyn , daughter of é omund ( Lady of Rohan , later of Ithilien , the White Lady of Rohan ) 512 , 515 , 520–5 passim , 777 , 782–5 , 795 , 796–7 , 801 , 802 , 841–5 passim , 858–70 passim , 874 , 958–66 passim , 969 , 977 , 978 , 1070 , 1090 , 1095 , 1097 ; disguised as Dernhelm 803 , 804 , 830 , 836–41 passim , 978 ; Lady of the Shield - arm 1070 
  Ephel Dúath ( Mountains of Shadow , Shadowy Mountains , Haunted Mountains , fences , walls of Mordor ) 244 , 251 , 288 , 401 , 631 , 636 , 639 , 641 , 642 , 649 , 650 , 651 , 659 , 692 , 697 , 699 , 703 , 708–10 , 717 , 723 , 730 , 731 , 736 , 764 , 801 , 884 , 885 , 899 , 900–1 , 916 , 918 , 919 , 922 , 927 , 941 , 971 , 1055 , 1127 
  Eradan 1039 
  Erebor ( Lonely Mountain , site of Dwarfkingdom ) 11 , 27 , 74 , 228 , 229 , 240 , 280 , 343 , 376 , 522 , 872 , 878 , 881 , 968 , 981 , 1072 , 1073 , 1077–80 passim , 1087 , 1088 , 1090 , 1094 , 1095 , 1126 ; Folk of see Dwarves of Erebor ; gate of 1080 , 1095 ; Great Hall of 1072 ; key of 1088 ; Dwarfkingdom of Dáin 1072 ; Kings under the Mountain II 
  Erech 782 , 874 , 1093 ; name 1129 ; Hill of 782 , 789 ; Stone of see Stone of Erech 
  Ered Lithui ( Ashen Mountains ) 625 , 631 , 636 , 637 , 639 , 891 , 923 , 927 , 933 , 1045 ; mountain - walls of Mordor 625 , 631 
  Ered Luin see Blue Mountains 
  Ered Mithrin 1064 
  Ered Nimrais see White Mountains 
  Eregion ( Hollin ) 47 , 242 , 253 , 254 , 282–6 passim , 301 , 303 , 306 , 985 , 1039 , 1071 , 1082–3 , 1092 , 1118 , 1126 ; elven - script of 253 ; Elves of see Elves : of Eregion ; road from , to Moria 300 , 301 , 303 ; see also Elven - smiths 
  Erelas 747 , 805 
  Eressëa 244 , 956 , 1042 , 1082 , 1116 ; Isles of the West 1060 ; Lost Isle 956 ; Haven of the Eldar in 1035 
  Erestor 240 , 265 , 267 , 269 , 972 
  Eriador 3 , 4 , 15 , 174 , 1039 , 1041 , 1043 , 1054 , 1061 , 1076 , 1077 , 1080 , 1083–8 passim , 1107 , 1127 , 1130 
  Erkenbrand , lord of Westfold 523 , 529 , 530 , 531 , 541 , 543 , 545 , 551 , 1093 
  Erling , son of Holman ‘ the greenhanded ’ 1105 
  Errand - riders of Gondor 748 , 751 , 762 , 765 , 798 , 802 , 835 
  Erui 875 ; Crossings of 1047 , 1086 ; see also Battle of the Crossings of Erui 
  Esgalduin ( Elven - river ) 191 , 193 
  Esgaroth ( Long Lake ) 30 , 57 , 229 , 1078 , 1089 , 1129 ; language of 1129 ; Men of 1129 
  Ethir Anduin see Anduin : mouths of 
  Ettendales 203 
  Ettenmoors 200 , 264 , 274 , 1040 , 1086 
  Evendim , Hills of ( Emyn Uial ) 1051 
  Evendim , Lake ( Nenuial ) 244 , 993 , 1044 , 1051 , 1097 , 1111 
  Evenstar see Arwen 
  Ever - eve ( Evereven ) see Eldamar 
  Everholt , great boar of 1069 
  Evermind see Simbelmynë 
  Evernight 235 
  Everwhite , Mount see Oiolossë 
  Exiles see Elves : Noldor ; Númenóreans 
  Express train , as analogy 28 
  Eye , the ( of Barad - dûr , of Mordor , of Sauron , Great Eye , Lidless Eye , Red Eye , etc . ) 364 , 365 , 366 , 401 , 446 , 452 , 499 , 564 , 589 , 605 , 625 , 630 , 631 , 632 , 642 , 738 , 879 , 880 , 885 , 898 , 936 , 942 , 946 ; Red Eye ( Evil Eye , the Eye ) , as emblem 416 , 451 , 821 , 888 , 903 , 913 , 924 ; sometimes used as a synonym for Sauron 
  Faces , so called by Gollum , see Moon ; Sun 
  Fair Folk see Elves 
  Fairbairn , Elfstan 1097 
  Fairbairns of Westmarch ( of the Towers ) 14 , 1097 , 1105 
  Faithful , the see Númenóreans 
  Falastur 1044 , 1085 
  Fall of Gil - galad , The 186 
  Fallohides 3–4 , 6 , 1085 , 1130 ; names 1135 
  Fang , Farmer Maggot ’s dog 92 , 93 
  Fangorn , the Ent see Treebeard 
  Fangorn Forest ( Entwood ) 285 , 373–4 , 381 , 421 , 427 , 428 , 429 , 437 , 438 , 440–3 passim , 450–9 passim , 461–500 , 504 , 547 , 548 , 549 , 553 , 560 , 563 , 564 , 565 , 585 , 586 , 588 , 779 , 978 , 981 , 1092 ; name ( Fangorn ) 1131 ; East End 468 
  Fanuidhol the Grey ( Bundushathûr , Bundushathûr , Cloudyhead ) 282 , 283 , 333 , 985 
  Far Downs 4 , 5 , 1030 , 1097 , 1105 
  Faramir , son of Denethor ( Captain of Gondor , of the White Tower , lord , later Steward of Gondor , of the Dwarfkingdom , etc . ) 15 , 245 , 246 , 657–96 passim , 707 , 708 , 711 , 722 , 726 , 755 , 759 , 765 , 766 , 772 , 808–27 passim , 850 , 852–7 , 860–6 passim , 870 , 884 , 885 , 914 , 922 , 937 , 959–69 passim , 974–8 passim , 1056 , 1057 , 1090 , 1092 , 1093 ; lord of Emyn Arnen 1039 ; Prince of Ithilien 969 , 976 , 977 
  Faramir , son of Ondoher 1049 
  Farin 1079 
  Farthings 9 , 99 , 232 ; see also Eastfarthing ; Northfarthing ; Southfarthing ; Westfarthing 
  Fastred , killed in Battle of the Pelennor Fields 849 
  Fastred , of Greenholm 1097 , 1105 
  Fastred , son of Folcwine 1054 , 1069 , 1088 
  Fatty Lumpkin 144 , 145 , 146 , 148 , 179 
  Fëanor 304 , 597 , 598 , 1033–4 , 1083 , 1116 , 1117 ; letters see Elvish writing ; Evenstar of the House of Fëanor [ of silver , had eight rays ] 304 ; see also Eldar 
  Felagund see Finrod Felagund 
  Felaró f ( Mansbane ) 435 , 508 , 1065 , 1068 
  Fell Winter 177 , 288 , 1089 
  Fellowship of the Ring ( Fellowship ) see Company of the Ring 
  Fen Hollen ( Closed Door , the Steward ’s Door ) 826 , 827 , 851 , 855 
  Fengel 977 , 1069 
  Fenmarch 803 , 804 
  Ferny , surname 155 
  Ferny , Bill ( Chief ’s Big Man ) 160 , 165 , 173–4 , 179 , 180–1 , 182 , 199 , 204 , 221 , 990 , 992 , 994 , 999 , 1004 
  Ferry see Bucklebury Ferry 
  Ferry lane 96 , 98 
  Fíli 1076 , 1078 , 1079 
  Fimbrethil ( Wandlimb ) [ Slim - birch ] 475 , 476 , 486 ; name 1131 
  Finarfin 1128 , 1137 
  Findegil , King ’s writer 14 , 15 
  Finduilas of Dol Amroth 961 , 1056 , 1089 , 1090 
  Finglas see Leaflock 
  Finrod Felagund ( Friend - of - Men ) 1042 , 1082 , 1128 ; House of 80 
  Fire- ( Fiery ) Mountain see Mount Doom 
  Firefoot 524 
  Fireworks 24 , 25 , 27–8 , 360 , 361 
  Fíriel 1049 , 1086 
  Firien Wood ( Firienwood ) 803 , 1069 ; alluded to 804 
  Firienfeld 794 , 795 
  First Age 1033 , 1034 , 1041 , 1071 , 1082 , 1107 , 1118 , 1128 , 1129 
  Firstborn see Elves 
  Fish and chips 655 
  Fladrif see Skinbark 
  Flet ( talan ) 342–3 , 344 , 345 , 346 , 351 , 354 , 383 , 388 
  Floating Log , The 1001 
  Flói 321 
  Flourdumpling see Whitfoot , Will 
  Folca 977 , 1069 
  Folcred 1054 , 1069 , 1088 
  Folcwine 977 , 1054 , 1067 , 1069 , 1088 
  Folde 803 , 804 
  Folklands 9 
  Forbidden Door see Door of the Dead 
  Forest River 367 
  Forlond see Grey Havens 
  Forlong the Fat , lord of Lossarnach 770 , 846 , 849 ; name 1129 
  Fornost ( Fornost Erain , Norbury of the Kings , Deadmen ’s Dike , north - city ) 4 , 5 , 9 , 244 , 781 , 993 , 1040 , 1041 , 1051 , 1086 ; last battle at see Battle of Fornost 
  Forochel 1041 ; see also Lossoth 
  Forochel , Bay of 1086 , 1127 
  Forochel , Cape of 1041 
  Forodwaith 1041 
  Forsaken Inn , The 187 
  Fourth Age 14 , 1033 , 1082 , 1096 , 1112 
  Fox , thinking 72 
  Fram 1064 , 1065 
  Frár 322 
  Fréa 977 , 1068 
  Fréaláf Hildeson 977 , 1067 , 1068 , 1088 
  Fréawine 977 , 1065 , 1068 
  Freca 1065 , 1066 
  Free Fair 10 , 1025 
  Free Peoples ( of the World , Free Folk ) 265 , 275 , 281 , 464 , 954 
  Frerin 1072 , 1074 , 1079 
  Frogmorton 1001 , 1002 , 1003 , 1096 
  Frór 1072 , 1079 
  Frumgar 1064 , 1097 
  Fundin 1074 , 1075 ; see also Balin , son of Fundin 
  Gaffer , the see Gamgee , Hamfast 
  Galadhrim see Elves of Lothlórien 
  Galadriel ( Lady of Lothlórien , of Lothlórien , of the Elves , of the Galadhrim , of the Golden Wood , of the Wood , the Lady , Elvish Lady , etc . ) 15 , 343 , 347–78 passim , 387 , 388 , 426 , 427 , 432 , 437 , 438 , 439 , 472 , 496 , 502 , 503 , 510 , 514 , 524 , 567 , 611 , 666 , 679–80 , 708 , 712 , 720 , 729 , 731 , 733 , 776 , 862 , 875 , 902 , 912 , 915 , 918 , 920 , 926 , 938 , 945 , 952 , 972 , 975 , 976 , 979 , 981 , 982 , 983 , 985 , 1022 , 1023 , 1028 , 1029 , 1030 , 1060 , 1063 , 1080 , 1081 , 1082 , 1085 , 1094 , 1096 , 1128 ; Lady that dies not 667 ; Mistress of Magic 667 ; Queen Galadriel 547 ; Sorceress of the Golden Wood 514 ; White Lady 679 ; gift of sheath for Andúril to Aragorn 374 , 511 ; gift of belt to Boromir 375 , 416 , 666–7 ; gift of hair to Gimli 376 , 378 , 382 , 503 ; gift of bow and arrows to Legolas 375 , 387 , 498 , 510 ; gift of belts to Merry and Pippin 375 ; gift of box to Sam 375 , 938 , 952 , 1022–3 , 1028 ; magic of 362 ; Mirror of see Mirror of Galadriel ; Phial of see Phial of Galadriel 
  Galathilion [ the Tree of the High Elves , which was derived from the elder of the Two Trees of the Valar , Telperion and Laurelin ] 971 
  Galdor 240 , 249–50 , 254 , 256 , 266 , 267 
  Galenas see Pipe - weed 
  Gamgee family 69 , 1105 , 1137 ; name 1138 
  Gamgee , Bell née Goodchild 1105 
  Gamgee , Bilbo 1105 
  Gamgee , Daisy , daughter of Hamfast 1105 
  Gamgee , Daisy , daughter of Samwise 1105 
  Gamgee , Elanor 1026 , 1029 , 1031 , 1044 , 1096 , 1097 , 1105 
  Gamgee , Frodo 1029 , 1105 
  Gamgee , Halfast 44 , 45 , 1105 
  Gamgee , Halfred , of Overhill 1105 
  Gamgee , Halfred , son of Hamfast 1105 
  Gamgee , Hamfast ( the Gaffer , Old Gamgee ) 22–4 , 26 , 38 , 63 , 69–70 , 75–6 , 263 , 361 , 363 , 366 , 608 , 611 , 623 , 624 , 637 , 657 , 680 , 700 , 934 , 995 , 1011 , 1014 , 1022 , 1024 , 1026 , 1091 , 1105 ; Ranugad ( Ran ) 1136 ; name 1136 ; and potatoes ( taters ) 22 , 24 , 654 , 1014 
  Gamgee , Hamfast , son of Samwise 1105 
  Gamgee , Hamson 1105 
  Gamgee , Hobson ‘ Roper ’ 611 , 1105 
  Gamgee , Marigold 934 , 1105 
  Gamgee , May 1105 
  Gamgee , Merry 1029 , 1105 
  Gamgee , Pippin 1029 , 1105 
  Gamgee , Primrose 1105 
  Gamgee , Robin 1105 
  Gamgee , Primrose , daughter of Samwise 1029 , 1105 
  Gamgee , Primrose , wife of Samwise see Cotton , Rose 
  Gamgee , Ruby 1105 
  Gamgee , Samwise ( Sam , Hamfast ’s Hildeson , Master Samwise , Sam Gardner , etc . ) 13 , 14 , 22 , 24 , 44–7 passim , 50 , 58 , 61–214 passim , 219 , 220 , 223–7 passim , 230 , 231 , 233 , 237 , 238 , 239 , 271–407 passim , 413 , 414 , 419 , 439 , 472 , 482 , 490 , 496 , 571 , 590 , 603–742 passim , 792 , 796 , 811–12 , 815 , 889 , 897–947 passim , 950–7 passim , 966 , 970 , 975 , 982–1031 passim , 1044 , 1090–9 passim , 1103 , 1105 , 1107 , 1112 , 1138 ; Banazîr 1136 ; Berhael 953 ; name 1136 
  Gamgee , Tolman ‘ Tom ’ 1105 
  Gamling the Marigold 530 , 531 , 535 , 536 , 538 , 543 
  Gammidge , Hob ‘ the Roper ’ , ‘ Old Gammidgy ’ 1105 
  Gammidge , Rowan 1105 
  Gamwich 1105 
  Gamwich , Wiseman 1105 
  Gandalf the Grey ( Mithrandir , Greyhame , Grey Pilgrim , Grey Wanderer , Gandalf the White , the Samwise , White Rider , Leader of the Gandalf , etc . ) 9 , 11 , 13 , 24–7 passim , 32–6 passim , 39–69 passim , 74 , 75 , 76 , 83 , 84 , 87 , 103 , 105–9 passim , 132–3 , 140 , 141 , 151 , 166–74 passim , 183 , 186–9 passim , 191 , 195 , 198 , 199 , 206–10 passim , 219–32 passim , 238 , 239 , 247–72 passim , 275–336 passim , 355–68 passim , 393 , 396 , 397 , 402 , 414 , 416 , 435 , 437 , 441 , 444 , 453 , 465–7 , 472 , 492–529 passim , 539–60 passim , 563 , 567 , 570 , 572–600 passim , 615 , 640 , 644 , 647 , 670–1 , 677 , 679 , 682 , 685–6 , 687 , 693 , 700 , 708 , 732 , 747–61 passim , 765–8 passim , 772 , 773 , 776 , 780 , 793 , 796 , 799 , 806–29 passim , 843 , 850–9 passim , 862–73 passim , 877–85 passim , 888–92 passim , 934 , 947–56 passim , 966 , 968 , 970–1 , 975 , 979–80 , 983–96 passim , 1018 , 1030 , 1055–6 , 1060 , 1069 , 1077–8 , 1080 , 1085–93 passim , 1096 , 1133 ; Grey Fool 824 , 853 ; Incánus , Olórin , Tharkûn 670 ; Lathspell 513 ; Stormcrow 513 , 750 ; voice of 401 , 495 
  Gap of Rohan 258 , 287 , 296 , 374 , 437 , 481 , 505 , 550 , 678 , 890 , 982 
  Gardner family 1099 , 1105 
  Gardner , Frodo 1105 
  Gardner , Holfast 1105 
  Gate of Kings see Argonath 
  Gate of Mordor see Morannon 
  Gate - stream see Sirannon 
  Gates of Gondor see Argonath 
  Ghân - buri - Ghân ( Wild Man ) 831–5 , 836 , 976 
  Ghâsh 327 
  Gift of Men ( Doom of Men ) 1035 , 1061 , 1063 
  Gildor Inglorion 80–6 passim , 105–6 , 126 , 132 , 172 , 210 , 590 , 1028 , 1113 
  Gil - galad 52 , 185–6 , 191 , 243 , 244 , 253 , 1034 , 1036 , 1037 , 1082–5 passim 
  Gilthoniel see Elbereth 
  Gilraen 1057–61 passim , 1088 , 1089 , 1090 , 1113 ; name 1128 
  Gilrain 875 
  Gimli , son of Glóin ( Durin ’s son ) 240 , 276 , 279–405 passim , 414–43 passim , 488–550 passim , 556–7 , 560–4 passim , 572 , 575–9 passim , 584 , 585–6 , 600 , 658 , 673 , 773 , 775–90 passim , 792 , 796 , 802 , 848 , 872–8 passim , 881 , 883 , 888 , 954 , 955 , 956 , 970 , 976 , 978 , 981 , 1033 , 1078–81 passim , 1098 , 1132–3 ; Lockbearer 503 ; one of the Three Hunters 420 , 491 
  Gladden Fields 52–3 , 244 , 254 , 274 , 1088 , 1089 ; Disaster of 52 , 243 , 1038 , 1085 
  Gladden River 274 , 1041 , 1053 , 1063 , 1074 , 1127 , 1129 , 1130 ; sources of 274 
  Glamdring 280 , 310 , 323 , 330 , 511 , 993 
  Glanduin 1039 
  Gléowine 976 
  Glittering Caves of Aglarond 547–8 , 600 , 776 , 955 , 978 ; lord of see Gimli 
  Glóin , son of Gróin 228–30 , 239 , 240–2 , 249 , 250 , 255 , 268 , 269 , 1076 , 1079 ; see also Gimli , son of Glóin 
  Glóin , son of Thorin I 1079 
  Glorfindel ( Elf - lord ) 209–14 passim , 220–7 passim , 239 , 240 , 265 , 266 , 267 , 269 , 276 , 972 , 1051 , 1070 , 1092 
  Goatleaf , surname 155 
  Goatleaf , Harry 151–2 , 164 , 174 , 990 , 992 
  Goblins see Orcs 
  Golasgil 771 
  Goldberry ( River - daughter ) 119 , 120 , 122–6 , 128 , 129 , 131–2 , 135–6 , 145 , 148 
  Golden Hall ( Golden House ) see Meduseld 
  Golden Perch , The 88 , 93 
  Golden Tree see Laurelin 
  Golden Wood see Lothlórien 
  Goldwine 977 , 1068 
  Gollum ( Sméagol , Slinker , Stinker , etc . ) 11 , 12 , 13 , 33 , 34 , 48 , 53–60 passim , 249 , 251–6 passim , 261 , 272 , 274 , 312 , 314 , 318 , 337 , 345 , 350 , 382–6 passim , 395 , 402 , 455 , 456 , 604 , 605 , 612–55 passim , 660 , 672 , 675 , 684–727 passim , 732 , 738–9 , 815 , 914 , 918 , 925 , 926 , 936 , 938 , 939 , 943–7 passim , 1087–94 passim ; name ( Sméagol ) 1030 , 1036 ; Sméagol - Gollum debate 632–4 
  Gondolin 243 , 316 , 357 , 1034 , 1115 
  Gondor ( South - kingdom , South , Southlands , etc . ) 4 , 8–9 , 14 , 15 , 240–8 passim , 252 , 256 , 266–7 , 279 , 296 , 331 , 338 , 367 , 368 , 390 , 392 , 396 , 402 , 415 , 417 , 422–3 , 431 , 432 , 433 , 436 , 442 , 474 , 475 , 508 , 510 , 513 , 516 , 522 , 528 , 563 , 597–8 , 609 , 636 , 639 , 650 , 659 , 660 , 666 , 667 , 670 , 671 , 678–9 , 684 , 690 , 691 , 692 , 694 , 697 , 702 , 711 , 729 , 747–59 passim , 763–70 passim , 780 , 782 , 795 , 798 , 799 , 802 , 803 , 804 , 811 , 813–14 , 820 , 824 , 831 , 833 , 834 , 838 , 846–9 passim , 855 , 860 , 862 , 869 , 873 , 877 , 881 , 882 , 883 , 886 , 888 , 890 , 892 , 900 , 952 , 957 , 958 , 965–6 , 971 , 974 , 977 , 986 , 987 , 992 , 1005 , 1033 , 1037–40 passim , 1043–56 passim , 1060 , 1064–71 passim , 1078 , 1080 , 1084–90 passim , 1095–8 passim , 1127 , 1129 , 1131 ; Realm in Exile 1038 , 1084 ; Stoningland 849 , 1054 ; names 1128 , 1129 ; calendar , reckoning of 1033 , 1068 , 1107 ; City of Gondor see Minas Tirith ; Council of 1049 ; Crown of see Crown of Gondor ; Errand - riders see Errand - riders of Gondor ; Fields of see Pelennor ; Kings , Ship - kings of 594 , 1038 , 1064 , 1085 ; language of 845 , 1069 , 1113 , 1115 , 1133 , 1134 ; Lords of see Stewards ; Men of ( folk , people , race , etc . ) 9 , 267 , 390 , 436 , 439 , 636 , 639 , 669 , 678–9 , 681 , 750 , 828 , 832 , 845 , 846 , 877 , 890 , 948 , 954 , 959 , 965 , 966 , 967 , 975–6 ; Minstrel of 954 ; Northern Army of 1049 , 1064 ; palantír of 597 ; southern fiefs 750 , 848 ; tombs of see Hallows ; wardens of Gondor upon the West ( at Orthanc ) 555 ; writing in 1122 ; East - borders 436 ; North March 668 ; South Gondor 1047 ; see also Anórien ; Beacon hills ; Ithilien ; Minas Tirith ; etc . 
  Goodbody family 28 , 29 , 30 , 1100 
  Goodbody , Lily ( Baggins ) 1100 
  Goodbody , Togo 1100 
  Gorbag 735–42 passim , 899 , 902 , 905–6 , 913 , 919 
  Gore see Naith of Lothlórien 
  Gorgoroth 244 , 401 , 636 , 642 , 682 , 705 , 710 , 892 , 900 , 901 , 922 , 923 , 927 , 934 , 941 , 950 
  Gothmog 846 
  Gram 977 , 1068 
  Grange , Old 1016 
  Great , the 2 , 270 
  Great Armament 1084 
  Great Battle , at end of First Age 1082 
  Great Bridge see Brandywine Bridge 
  Great Danger 1029 
  Great Darkness , of Morgoth 468 , 473 , 486 
  Great Enemy see Morgoth 
  Great Gate of the Lothlórien see Minas Tirith 
  Great Gate(s ) see Moria 
  Great Jewel see Silmaril(s ) 
  Great Southlands see Middle - earth 
  Great River see Anduin 
  Great Ships , Númenórean 473 
  Great Siege 739 
  Great Signal 705–6 , 738 
  Great Smials ( Great Place of the Tooks ) 7 , 14 , 15 , 461 , 1009 , 1010 , 1088 , 1103 
  Great Wars [ against Morgoth and Sauron ] 472 
  Great Years 1091–5 
  Green Dragon , The 44 , 66 , 148 , 1003 , 1004 
  Green Hills ( Green Hill Country ) , of the Shire 71 , 1009 , 1015 , 1027 
  Green Hills , of Gondor see Pinnath Gelin 
  Greenhand , Halfred 1105 
  Greenhand , Holman 1105 
  Greenway ( North Road ) 9 , 150 , 153 , 155 , 164 , 256 , 263 , 274 , 992 , 993 , 1005 , 1091 ; Greenway - crossing 151 
  Greenwood the Great see Mirkwood 
  Grey Company 503 , 776 , 782 , 785–90 passim 
  Grey - elven see Sindarin 
  Grey - elves see Eldar 
  Grey Host see Dead , the 
  Grey Havens 7 , 16 , 43 , 45 , 240 , 249 , 266 , 284 , 348 , 874 , 974 , 1029 , 1030 , 1034 , 1039 , 1043 , 1050 , 1062 , 1083 , 1085 , 1096 , 1097 ; Forlond 1050 ; Harlond 1050 ; Mithlond 598 , 1030 
  Grey Mountains 1072 , 1087 
  Grey Pilgrim see Gandalf 
  Grey Wood 835 , 976 , 1093 
  Greyflood ( Gwathló ) 200 , 274 , 275 , 285 , 374 , 984 , 993 , 1039 , 1040 , 1045 , 1091 
  Gríma , son of Gálmód see Wormtongue 
  Grimbeorn the Old 228 
  Grimbold [ a marshal distinguished in battles at the Fords of Isen , commanded the Left - wing and fell in the battle of Pelennor ] 551 , 836 , 837 , 849 
  Grimslade 849 
  Grip 92 , 93 , 94 
  Grishnákh 446–7 , 451–8 passim , 489 , 490 , 564 , 1114 , 1132 
  Gróin 1079 
  Grond , battering - ram 828–9 
  Grond , Hammer of the Underworld , Morgoth ’s mace 828 
  Grór 1072 , 1074 , 1079 , 1087 
  Grubb family 28 , 29 , 30 
  Grubb , Laura 28 
  Guards of the Citadel ( of Minas Tirith ) 752–3 , 762 , 767 , 769 , 772 , 798 , 857 , 883 , 953 , 966–9 passim ; livery of 753 , 807 , 811 , 850 , 851 , 862 , 953 , 955 , 966 , 1005 
  Guarded City see Minas Tirith 
  Guardians see Valar 
  Gundabad 1074 
  Guthláf 838 , 843 , 849 
  Gúthwine ( Éomer ’s sword ) 533 
  Gwaihir the Windlord 127 , 261–2 , 272 , 495 , 502 , 948–51 passim , 1092 
  Gwathló see Greyflood 
  Hador , steward 1039 , 1108 
  Hador the Goldenhaired , the Elf - friend 271 , 678 ; House of Hador 1034 
  Halbarad 774–9 passim , 782 , 786 , 789 , 848 , 849 
  Haldir 343–55 passim , 359 , 370–1 , 372 , 383 , 609 
  Haleth Helm ’s son 1066 , 1068 
  Half - elven ( Peredhil ) 398 , 1034–5 ; see also Elrond the Halfelven 
  Halflings see Hobbits 
  Halflings , country of see Shire 
  Halifirien 747 , 804 
  Hall of Fire see Rivendell Hall of the Kings ( of the Tower ) see Citadel of Gondor 
  Hallas 1039 
  Hallow , on Mount Mindolluin 970 , 971 
  Hallows , in Minas Tirith 852 , 969 ; see also House of the Kings ; House of the Stewards 
  Háma , captain of the King ’s Guard 510 , 511 , 514–19 passim , 523 , 528 , 545 , 580 
  Háma , Helm ’s son 1066 , 1068 
  Hamfast of Gamwich 1105 
  Hammer of the Underworld see Grond 
  Harad ( South ) 248 , 659 , 661 , 765 , 811 , 828 , 1054 , 1085 , 1086 , 1115 ; Haradwaith 1045 ; Sunlands 647 ; havens of 400 ; kingdoms of , in the Far South 659 ; kings of 1045 ; men of see Haradrim 
  Haradrim ( folk , men , peoples of Harad ) 245 , 659 , 678 , 799 , 811 , 817 , 839 , 843 , 846 , 875 , 876 , 886 , 949 , 968 , 1045 , 1047 , 1048 , 1049 , 1054 , 1069 , 1086 , 1088 ; champion of 821 ; chieftain ( the black serpent ) 839 , 840 , 842 ; men like half - trolls from Far Harad 846 , 848 ; Men of Near Harad 1049 ; Southrons 659 , 660 , 675 , 839 , 846 , 848 , 864 , 957 , 987 ; dead Southron 660–1 ; Swarthy Men 800 ; Swertings 647 , 661 
  Hardbottle 1021 
  Harding , of Rohan 849 
  Harding of the Hill 1105 
  Harfoots 3 , 6 , 1085 , 1130 
  Harlond see Grey Havens 
  Harlond , harbour of Minas Tirith 750 , 846–7 , 848 , 877 , 881 
  Harnen 1045 
  Harrowdale 783 , 791 , 792–3 , 797 , 1068 , 1093 
  Hasufel 439 , 440 , 443 , 488 , 504 , 506 , 509 , 524 , 539 , 560 , 773 
  Haudh in Gwanûr 1054 
  Haunted Mountain see Dwimorberg 
  Haunted Pass see Cirith Gorgor 
  Havens see Grey Havens 
  Hay Gate see Buckland 
  Haysend 99 , 113 
  Hayward , Hob 998 , 999 , 1000 
  Healers see Houses of Healing 
  Heathertoes , surname 155 
  Heathertoes , Mat 992 
  Hedge see High Hay 
  Helm ‘ Hammerhand ’ 531 , 540 , 977 , 1054 , 1065–8 passim , 1088 ; horn of 539 , 540 , 976 
  Helm ’s Deep ( the Deep ) 527–53 passim , 566 , 580 , 589 , 595 , 600 , 782 , 783 , 977 , 978 , 1066–7 , 1088 , 1093 , 1095 ; caverns of see Glittering Caves of Aglarond ; see also Deeping - coomb ; Deeping Stream ; Deeping Wall 
  Helm ’s Dike ( the Dike ) 430 , 529 , 530 , 532 , 541 , 543 , 545 , 546 , 553 , 777 , 779 , 782 , 1067 
  Helm ’s Gate ( the Gate ) 528 , 529 , 530 , 531 , 541 , 545 
  Helmingas see Westfold : men of 
  Hending , son of Holman ‘ the greenhanded ’ 1105 
  Henneth Annûn , Window of the Sunset ( Window - curtain , Curtain ) 674 , 683–6 passim , 695 , 696 , 811 , 886 , 957 , 1054 , 1088 , 1093 
  Herblore of the Shire 8 , 15 
  Herefara 849 
  Herion 1039 
  Herubrand 849 
  Herugrim ( Théoden ’s sword ) 517 , 518 , 519 
  Hidden Land see Lothlórien 
  High City see Citadel of Gondor 
  High Court see Citadel of Gondor 
  High - elven see Quenya 
  High Elves see Eldar : Noldor 
  High Hay ( Hedge ) 99 , 107 , 109 , 110 , 111 , 130 
  High Pass see Cirith Ungol 
  High Pass , in Misty Mountains 228 
  Hild 1067 
  Hill , the ( Hobbiton Hill ) 21 , 22 , 24 , 26 , 40 , 45 , 69 , 70 , 76 , 95 , 263 , 359 , 363 , 1016 , 1017 , 1020 , 1022 , 1112 
  Hill of Hearing see Amon Lhaw 
  Hill of the Eye , of Sight see Amon Hen 
  Hill Road 69 , 1017 
  Hill - trolls see Trolls 
  Hillmen see Dunlendings ; Rhudaur 
  Hirgon 798 , 799 , 800 , 801 , 835 
  Hirluin the Fair 771 , 846 , 849 
  Hither Shore(s ) see Middle - earth 
  Hithlain [ mist - thread ] 371 
  Hoarwell ( Mitheithel ) 3 , 200 , 208 , 264 , 274 , 1040 , 1041 , 1092 ; name 1134 ; Bridge of Mitheithel see Last Bridge 
  Hobbit , The 1 , 11–13 , 1136 
  Hobbiton 6 , 21–8 , 42 , 45 , 66 , 68 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 75–6 , 84 , 94–5 , 102 , 167 , 231 , 232 , 249 , 262–3 , 359 , 288 , 471 , 607 , 918 , 1000 , 1001 , 1004 , 1009–17 passim , 1022 , 1023 , 1091 , 1096 , 1100 , 1112 ; folk of 1013 
  Hobbiton Road 1004 , 1106 
  Hobbits ( Little Folk , Little People ) 1–32 passim , 36–45 passim , 48 , 49 , 52–5 passim , 62 , 66 , 67 , 69 , 70 , 72 , 92 , 94 , 95 , 107 , 108 , 131 , 265 , 297 , 434 , 465 , 481 , 490 , 557 , 586 , 761–2 , 998–1024 passim , 1041 , 1107 , 1131 ; Halflings 343 , 348 , 399 , 434 , 445 , 453 , 658 , 668 , 681 , 755 , 811 , 966 , 1130 ; Holbytla(n ) 557 , 842 , 1130 , 1138 ; Periain , Periannath ( sing . Perian ) 14 , 768 , 807 , 859 , 870 , 886 , 966 , 1085 , 1086 ; and architecture , craft of building 6 , 7 ; and boats , water 7 , 22–3 , 99 , 368 ; calendar of see Shire Reckoning ; character , appearance 1–3 ; education , lore 1 , 2 , 3 , 7 , 10 , 14–18 , 48 , 597 , 1133 ; passion for family history 22 , 558 ; food and drink 2 , 26–9 , 42 , 102 , 560–1 , etc . ; dislike of heights 344 ; Hobbitry - in - arms 9 ; language of 2 , 4 , 1115 , 1130 , 1133 , 1134–5 ; legends , stories of 557–8 , 734 , 760 ; and mushrooms 102 ; names of race 1114 , 1137–8 ; names of Hobbits 1113 , 1130 , 1135–6 , 1137–8 ; custom of presents 2 , 5 , 27 ; smoking 8–9 , 558 , 562–3 , see also Pipe - weed ; toughness of 6 , 222 , 327 ; writing ( letters , script ) 4 ; see also Bree ; Fallowhides ; Harfoots ; Mathom ; Shire , the ; Stoors ; etc . 
  Holbytla(n ) see Hobbits 
  Hold see Dunharrow 
  Hollin see Eregion 
  Hollin gate see Moria 
  Holman ‘ the greenhanded ’ 22 , 23 , 1105 
  Horn , Rider of Rohan 849 
  Horn - call , cry of Buckland see Buckland 
  Horn of Boromir 279 , 330 , 413 , 414 , 416 , 417 , 666 , 667–8 , 679 , 755 , 1092 
  Horn of the Mark , given to Meriadoc 978 , 1007 , 1015 , 1017 , 1112 
  Hornblower family 28 , 29 , 30 , 49 
  Hornblower pipe - weed brandmarks 562 , 574 
  Hornblower , Tobold ( Tobold the Tobold , Old Toby ) 8 , 558 , 559 , 1087 
  Hornburg ( the Hornburg ) 528–40 passim , 545 , 546 , 553 , 580 , 775–82 passim , 848 , 879 , 1066 , 1069 , 1093 , 1132 ; Hornburg - gates 533 ; see also Battle of the Hornburg 
  Hornrock ( Hornrock ) 528 , 529 , 533–41 passim 
  Horse - men ’s road 832 
  Host of the West , against Witch - king 1051 
  Host of the West , army from Valinor at end of First Age 1072 
  Host of the West ( army of the West , Men of the West ) , against Sauron 1094 
  Host of Valinor 1082 
  Hound of Sauron see Wolves 
  House of Húrin see Stewards 
  House of the Kings ( Houses of the Dead ) 969 , 1052 , 1062 , 1063 
  House of the Stewards , tombs 824 , 826–7 , 851 
  Houses of Healing 855–74 passim , 958 , 959 , 961 , 964 , 965 , 966 ; Healers 855 , 859 , 860 , 884 , 958 , 959 , 960 ; herbmaster of 863 , 865 , 868 ; Warden of 870–1 , 958–9 , 960 , 961 , 964 , 965 
  Houses of the Dead see House of the Kings 
  Hundred - weight Feast 42 
  Hunter ’s Moon 274 
  Huor 1034 
  Huorns 487 , 541–6 passim , 549 , 552 , 553 , 565–72 passim , 577 ; darkness of 526–7 
  Húrin , of the First Age 271 ; name 1128 
  Húrin I , steward 1039 
  Húrin II , steward 1039 
  Húrin of Emyn Arnen , steward 1039 , 1052 ; House of see Stewards 
  Húrin the Tall , Warden of the Keys 846 , 959 , 966 , 968 
  Hyarmendacil ‘ South - victor ’ ( Ciryaher ) 1038 , 1045 , 1085 
  Hyarmendacil II ( Vinyarion ) 1038 , 1086 
  Iarwain Ben - adar see Bombadil , Tom 
  Idril Celebrindal 1034 
  Ilmarin 235 , 372 
  Imlad Morgul see Morgul Vale 
  Imladris see Rivendell 
  Imloth Melui 866 , 966 
  Imrahil , Prince of Dol Amroth ( the Prince , Lord of Dol Amroth ) 750 , 771 , 791 , 808 , 816 , 820 , 821 , 824 , 845–51 passim , 855 , 861–6 passim , 872 , 873 , 878 , 880–1 , 882 , 884 , 888 , 889 , 891 , 955 , 966 , 976 , 978 , 1070 , 1113 ; name 1113 
  Incánus see Gandalf 
  Ingold 749 , 821 
  Inland Sea see Núrnen ; Rhûn , Sea of 
  Ioreth 860 , 862 , 863 , 865 , 866 , 966 , 1114 
  Iorlas 769 
  Írensaga 794 
  Iron Crown 712 , 1034 
  Iron Hills 1072 , 1074 , 1076 , 1078 , 1087 , 1088 , 1089 
  Isen 296 , 527 , 551 , 552 , 553 , 566 , 569 , 574 , 982 , 993 , 1065 , 1066 , 1068 , 1069 , 1091 
  Isen , Fords ( Crossings ) of 526 , 528 , 529 , 545 , 548–52 passim , 566 , 580 , 596 , 773–4 , 1066 , 1070 , 1091 ; mouths of 1054 ; see also Battles of the Fords of Isen 
  Isengard 127 , 258 , 260 , 296 , 400 , 416 , 421 , 425 , 435 , 437 , 446 , 452 , 456 , 460 , 472–5 passim , 481 , 482 , 485 , 486 , 487 , 490 , 497–8 , 500 , 505 , 518 , 521 , 526 , 527 , 529 , 532 , 533 , 535 , 539 , 541 , 544 , 548 , 552–76 , 582–3 , 585 , 588 , 589 , 594 , 595 , 598 , 599 , 644 , 749 , 757 , 765 , 773 , 890 , 978–9 , 984 , 1004 , 1005 , 1018 , 1054 , 1055 , 1066–9 passim , 1088 , 1089 , 1093 , 1095 , 1131 ; Angrenost 473 ; creatures of 536 ; emblem of ( white hand ) 437 , 446 , 449 , 474 , 533 , 554 ; gates of 548 , 554 ; Lord of see Saruman ; Ring ( circle ) of 261 , 554–5 ; Isengarders see Orcs ; see also Orthanc ; White Hand ; Wizard ’s Vale 
  Isengrim II 1088 , 1109 
  Isenmouthe ( Carach Angren ) 920 , 927–8 , 930 , 933 , 1094 
  Isildur , son of Elendil 52 , 55 , 56 , 242–9 passim , 252 , 254 , 276 , 393 , 433 , 641 , 663 , 664 , 671 , 678 , 707 , 780 , 782 , 789 , 875 , 876 , 967 , 1037 , 1038 , 1039 , 1043 , 1049 , 1056 , 1057 , 1084 , 1085 , 1089 , 1116 , 1128 ; heirs , House of ( Northern Line ) 854 , 1038 , 1039 , 1040 , 1042 , 1044 , 1088 , see also Aragorn II , Valandil ; name 1128 ; scroll of 252–3 , 1090 
  Isildur ’s Bane see Ring , the 
  Istari see Wizards 
  Ithil - stone see Palantír 
  Ithildin [ starmoon ] 304 , 317 
  Ithilien 245 , 650–1 , 657 , 659 , 672 , 674 , 675 , 692 , 696 , 703 , 750 , 752 , 762 , 765 , 811 , 812 , 814 , 885 , 900 , 937 , 951 , 955 , 957 , 965 , 969 , 1047 , 1048 , 1049 , 1052–5 passim , 1069 , 1080 , 1088 , 1089 , 1093 , 1094 , 1097 , 1098 , 1115 ; see also South Ithilien 
  Ivorwen 1057 
  Ivy Bush , The 22 , 66 
  Jewels , Three see Silmarils 
  Khand 846 , 1049 
  Khazâd see Dwarves 
  Khazad - dûm see Moria 
  Kheled - zâram see Mirrormere 
  Khuzdul see Dwarves : language of 
  Kibil - nâla see Celebrant 
  Kíli 1076 , 1078 , 1079 
  King of Angmar see Witch - king 
  King of the Dead see Dead , the 
  King of the Mark ( Rohan ) see Éomer ; Théoden ; etc . 
  King of the Mountains 782 
  King ’s Court , Númenor 1110 
  King ’s Men ( Black Númenóreans ) see Númenóreans 
  King ’s messengers 1005 
  King ’s Writer see Findegil 
  Kings see under names of places , e.g. Gondor , and names of individual kings , e.g. Théoden 
  Kings of Men see Númenóreans 
  Kings under the Mountain 11 ; see also Erebor 
  Kings ’ Reckoning 1107–12 passim 
  Kingsfoil see Athelas 
  Kin - strife 1038 , 1045 , 1046 , 1052 , 1086 
  Lady of Lothlórien ( of the Golden Wood , etc . ) see Galadriel 
  Lady of Rivendell see Arwen 
  Lagduf 905 
  Lake Town see Esgaroth 
  Lamedon 771 , 790 , 848 , 874 , 875 ; Lord of see Angbor 
  Lampwright ’s Street ( Rath Celerdain ) 768 , 771 
  Land of Shadow see Mordor 
  Landroval 948 , 950 
  Langstrand ( Anfalas ) 296 , 770 , 1048 , 1134 ; name 1134 
  Languages , of Middle - earth 307 , 1127–38 ; see also language(s ) under names of peoples , e.g. Dwarves , and names of individual languages or language groups , e.g. Adûnaic ; Elvish languages 
  Lassemista 483 , 484 
  Last Alliance of Elves and Men 185 , 243 , 244 , 900 , 1037 , 1084 
  Last Bridge ( Bridge of Mitheithel ) 200 , 201 , 210 , 1092 
  Last Homely House see Rivendell 
  Last Mountain see Methedras 
  Last Ship 1039 
  Last Shore see Aman 
  Laurelin ( Golden Tree ) 372 , 598 , 644 , 1033 ; one of the Two Trees of Valinor 1034 
  Laurelindórenan see Lothlórien 
  Leaf see Pipe - weed 
  Leaflock ( Finglas ) 474–5 
  Lebennin 296 , 750 , 764 , 765 , 816 , 846 , 848 , 873 , 875 , 877 , 965 , 1047 , 1093 
  Lebethron 694 , 966 
  Lefnui 1066 
  Legolas Greenleaf 240 , 255 , 272 , 275 , 279–405 passim , 414–43 passim , 488–550 passim , 556–77 passim , 585 , 586 , 658 , 773 , 775–92 passim , 796 , 848 , 872–8 passim , 883 , 886 , 888 , 954–7 passim , 970 , 976 , 978 , 981 , 1080 , 1081 , 1098 ; one of the Three Hunters 420 , 491 
  Lembas ( waybread ) [ len - Lembas ‘ way - bread ’ ] 369 , 370 , 427 , 429 , 454 , 457 , 458 , 462 , 489 , 490 , 561 , 604 , 622 , 624 , 652 , 711 , 914 , 919 , 920 , 921 , 927 , 928 , 936 , 938 , 655 
  Léod 1064 , 1065 
  Léofa ( Brytta ) 977 , 1068 
  Libraries 14–15 , 252 , 277 , 1111 
  Lidless Eye see Eye , the 
  Lightfoot 845 
  Limlight 881 , 1053 , 1064 
  Lindir 237 
  Lindon ( Elvish Lothlórien ) 1039 , 1040 , 1041 , 1050 , 1051 , 1082 , 1083 , 1086 
  Linhir 875 , 1093 
  Lithe 10 , 1106 , 1109 , 1110 
  Lithlad 636 
  Little folk , people see Hobbits 
  Lockholes 1001 , 1002 , 1009 , 1010 , 1011 , 1013 , 1021 
  Lonely Mountain see Erebor 
  Long Cleeve 1097 , 1103 
  Long Lake see Esgaroth 
  Long Winter 5 , 1054 , 1066 , 1068 , 1088 
  Longbeards see Dwarves 
  Longbottom 8 , 9 , 558 , 1009 
  Longbottom Leaf 8 , 562 , 870 
  Longholes , surname 155 
  Lóni 322 
  Lord of Barad - dûr see Sauron 
  Lord of Minas Tirith see Denethor II ; Stewards 
  Lord of the Mark ( Rohan ) see Éomer ; Théoden 
  Lord of the Nazgûl see Witch - king 
  Lord of the Ring see Sauron 
  Lords of the Lothlórien see Stewards 
  Lothlórien see Lothlórien 
  Lossarnach ( Lossarnach ) 750 , 764 , 770 , 771 , 849 , 863 , 864 , 881 , 886 , 1069 , 1070 , 1129 
  Lossoth ( Snowmen of Forochel ) 1041 , 1042 
  Lothíriel 1070 
  Lothlórien ( Lothlórien , Golden Wood , Elfcountry , Elvish country , etc . ) 227 , 253 , 266 , 274 , 283 , 334–78 passim , 380–3 passim , 386 , 387 , 388 , 391 , 400 , 402 , 416 , 424 , 432 , 436 , 438 , 467 , 469 , 472 , 476 , 489 , 502 , 510 , 514 , 590 , 608 , 609 , 625 , 667 , 668 , 673 , 676 , 677 , 679 , 680 , 720 , 731 , 732 , 807 , 862 , 872 , 918 , 933 , 972 , 978 , 979 , 985 , 986 , 987 , 1026 , 1040 , 1043 , 1058 , 1060 , 1063 , 1076 , 1087 , 1089 , 1090 , 1092–5 passim , 1127 ; Dreamflower 467 ; Dwimordene [ Vale of Illusion , name in Rohan for Lothlórien ] 514 ; Egladil 347 , 373 ; Laurelindórenan ( Land of the Valley of Singing Gold ) 467 , 667 , 979 ; Elves of ( Galadhrim ) see Elves : of Lothlórien ; name 1127 ; time in 358 , 388–9 , 503 ; see also East Lórien ; Naith of Lórien ; Northern Fences 
  Loudwater see Bruinen 
  Lugbúrz see Barad - dûr 
  Lugdush 449 , 453 
  Lune ( Lhûn ) , river 4 , 1039 , 1041 , 1051 , 1076 , 1082 , 1134 ; name 1134 
  Lune , Firth of 1030 
  Lune , Gulf of 598 , 1039 , 1042 
  Lune , Mountains of see Blue Mountains Lúthien Tinúviel [ Tinúviel = nightingale ] 191–4 passim , 214 , 227 , 243 , 277 , 723 , 876 , 974 , 1034 , 1058 , 1059 ; lay of Beren and Lúthien ( Lay of Lúthien ) 277 , 1058 
  Mablung 659 , 661 , 662 , 668 , 669 , 672 , 673 , 886 
  Maggot family 92 , 95–6 
  Maggot , Farmer 91–7 , 100 , 102 , 103 , 132 
  Maggot , Mrs. 93 , 96–7 , 102 
  Malbeth the Seer 781 , 1050 
  Mallor 1038 
  Mallorn ( Golden Tree , pl . mellyrn ) 335 , 342 , 349 , 350 , 351 , 354 , 371 , 489 , 1023 , 1063 , 1096 , 1112 
  Mallos 875 
  Malvegil 1038 , 1040 
  Man in the Moon 158–60 
  Mannish languages see Men : languages of Manwë ( Elder King ) 235 
  Maps , mentioned 277 , 283 , 285 , 927 
  Marcho 4 , 1099 
  Mardil Voronwë ‘ the Steadfast ’ 670 , 755 , 1039 , 1052 , 1053 , 1087 , 1108 
  Marish 6 , 88 , 89 , 92 , 98 , 102 , 607 , 809 , 1087 , 1104 , 1135 ; names in 1135 
  Mark , the see Rohan 
  Master of Buckland , of the Hall see Brandybuck family Mathom 5 , 15 , 37 , 1113 , 1130 , 1136 
  Mathom - house ( museum ) 5 , 13 , 317 
  Mauhúr 454 , 457 , 457 
  Mazarbul , Book of see Book of Mazarbul 
  Mazarbul , Chamber of see Chamber of Mazarbul 
  Mearas 435 , 504 , 508 , 1065 
  Meduseld ( Golden Hall , house of Eorl ) 437 , 439 , 500 , 504 , 507 , 510–23 , 527 , 543 , 551 , 581 , 600 , 747 , 773 , 777 , 793 , 797 , 802 , 843 , 849 , 867 , 955 , 976 , 977 , 1066 , 1067 , 1068 , 1087 
  Melian 1034 
  Mellon [ friend ] 305 , 308 
  Men ( Big Folk , Big People , Mortal Men ) 1–7 passim , 50 , 51 , 75 , 76 , 83 , 94 , 102 , 119 , 131 , 145 , 148 , 149–50 , 152 , 155 , 156 , 190 , 193 , 194 , 220–1 , 222 , 227 , 235 , 243 , 244 , 259 , 275 , 281 , 292 , 297 , 320 , 354 , 359 , 369 , 391 , 397 , 398 , 400 , 420 , 430 , 438 , 442 , 454 , 464 , 465 , 468 , 472 , 473 , 475 , 476 , 478 , 508 , 514 , 534 , 545 , 547 , 550 , 553 , 554 , 560 , 566 , 567 , 574 , 580 , 597 , 616 , 646 , 649 , 650 , 661 , 667 , 670 , 675–81 passim , 685 , 687 , 692 , 695 , 697 , 723 , 821 , 873 , 923 , 924 , 981 , 1044 , 1045 , 1050 , 1062 , 1073 , 1080 , 1082 , 1084 , 1094 , 1095 , 1097 , 1128 , 1132 ; alphabets of 1118 ; calendar of 1107 , 1110 ; dominion of 971 , 1082 ; fail but seed springs up 873 ; languages of 307 , 320 , 486 , 1123 , 1128 , 1129 , 1130 , 1132 , 1133 , 1135 , 1136 , 1137 , see also Adûnaic , Common Speech ; names of 1128 , 1135 ; see also Dunlendings ; Gift of Men ; Haradrim ; Last Alliance of Elves and Men ; Númenóreans ; Rohirrim ; and names of places inhabited by Men , e.g. Gondor 
  Men of the Mountains see Dead , the 
  Men of the Twilight see Rohirrim 
  Meneldil 244 , 252 , 1038 , 1049 , 1085 
  Meneldor 950 , 951 
  Meneltarma 1035 
  Menelvagor ( Telumehtar , Orion ) 81 , 1113 
  Mere of Dead Faces see Dead Marshes 
  Merethrond , the Great Hall of Feasts 975 
  Methedras ( Last Mountain ) 429 , 469 , 470 , 481 
  Michel Delving 5 , 6 , 23 , 156 , 157 , 277 , 317 , 1009 , 1012 , 1021 ; mathom - house of 5 , 13 , 317 ; Mayor of see Whitfoot , Will 
  Middle - earth ( middle world , mortal lands , etc . ) 2 , 5 , 7 , 16 , 43 , 79 , 149 , 193 , 198 , 221 , 234 , 236 , 242 , 250 , 266 , 268 , 307 , 336 , 343 , 349 , 357 , 375 , 377 , 499 , 547 , 550 , 567 , 581 , 595 , 599 , 677 , 679 , 684 , 712 , 720 , 788 , 791 , 873 , 874 , 888 , 911 , 917 , 945 , 948 , 967 , 981 , 1023 , 1029 , 1030 , 1033–9 passim , 1043 , 1044 , 1048 , 1058 , 1061 , 1062 , 1080–5 passim , 1098 , 1107 , 1115 , 1117 , 1128 , 1129 ; Great Lands 677 ; Hither Shore(s ) 236 , 341 , 373 ; name 1115 ; solar year in 1107 ; West of 306 , 1034 
  Middle Peoples see Rohirrim 
  Midgewater Marshes 182–3 , 184 
  Midsummer 10 , 972 , 973 , 1025 
  Mid - year ’s Day 1106 , 1109 
  Mill , in Hobbiton 362–3 , 1012 , 1013 , 1016–17 , 1022 
  Minalcar see Rómendacil II 
  Minardil 1038 , 1048 , 1052 , 1086 
  Minas Anor , Tower of the ( Setting ) Sun 244 , 245 , 252 , 598 , 671 , 884 , 963 , 964 , 1037 , 1044 , 1047 , 1048 , 1052 , 1084 , 1085 , 1086 ; Anor - stone ( palantír ) 1086 ; King ’s House 1086 ; see also later name Minas Tirith 
  Minas Ithil , Tower of the ( Rising ) Moon ( Moontower ) 244–5 , 246 , 598 , 641 , 642 , 677 , 691 , 692 , 697 , 703 , 884 , 969 , 1037 , 1051 , 1056 , 1084 , 1087 ; Ithilstone ( palantír ) see palantír ; see also later name Minas Morgul 
  Minas Morgul , Moontower of Sorcery ( Dead City , accursed tower ) 245 , 250 , 401 , 598 , 642 , 643 , 691 , 692 , 703–8 passim , 736 , 737 , 764 , 812 , 817 , 848 , 882 , 884 , 900 , 1052 , 1087 ; host(s ) , legions of ( Morgul - host , etc . ) 706 , 707 , 819 , 820 , 843 , 846 , 906 , 1093 ; King of see Witch - king ; see also earlier name Minas Ithil 
  Minas Tirith , Moontower of Guard ( the City , Stone - city , etc . ) 14 , 15 , 245–8 passim , 252 , 276 , 358 , 367–70 passim , 373 , 374 , 389 , 390 , 393 , 395 , 397–404 passim , 414 , 417 , 418 , 422 , 434 , 435 , 436 , 496 , 497 , 508 , 509 , 516–17 , 550 , 600 , 609 , 658 , 659 , 663 , 664 , 668–72 passim , 677 , 679 , 690 , 692 , 748 , 751 , 752 , 759 , 760 , 763 , 766–73 , 780 , 791 , 799 , 801 , 803 , 804 , 807 , 808 , 810 , 811 , 816–39 passim , 843–7 passim , 850–62 passim , 866 , 869–78 passim , 881 , 883 , 885 , 886 , 897 , 955–75 passim , 978 , 979 , 1027 , 1054 , 1055 , 1056 , 1062 , 1063 , 1078 , 1080 , 1088–95 passim , 1129 , 1133 ; Guarded City 751 ; Mundburg [ guardian - fortress ] 508 , 509 , 803 , 804 , 835 , 978 ; Seven Gates 748 ; see also earlier name Minas Anor ; Captains of 758 ; Gate of ( Great Gate , Gate of Gondor ) 750 , 751 , 752 , 763 , 764 , 768–71 passim , 791 , 809 , 810 , 819–24 passim , 827 , 828 , 829 , 839 , 843 , 849 , 850 , 852 , 855 , 858 , 861 , 881 , 966 , 970 , 1093 ; Lord(s ) of see Stewards ; men of the City ( of the Moontower of Guard ) 358 , 369 , 370 , 390 , 883 , 884 , 891 ; mounds of 849 ; palantír of ( Anor - Ithilstone ) see palantír ; Second Gate of 827 ; see also Citadel of Gondor ; House of the Kings ; House of the Stewards ; Houses of Healing ; Lampwright ’s Street ( Rath Celerdain ) ; Rath Dínen ( Silent Street ) 
  Minastan 1038 
  Mindolluin see Mount Mindolluin 
  Mines of Moria see Moria 
  Minhiriath 1041 , 1089 
  Min - Rimmon ( Rimmon ) 747 , 805 , 832 , 965 , 1093 , 1129 ; name 1129 
  Mirkwood ( Great Wood , Wood , etc . ) 3 , 44 , 47 , 51 , 52 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 74 , 228 , 240 , 250 , 253 , 255 , 256 , 261 , 273 , 274 , 335 , 339 , 375 , 400 , 432 , 461 , 472 , 475 , 491 , 507 , 532 , 547 , 585 , 675 , 684 , 723 , 765 , 872 , 968 , 981 , 1045 , 1053 , 1063 , 1064 , 1071 , 1072 , 1077 , 1085 , 1090 , 1094 , 1127 , 1132 ; Eryn Lasgalen 1094 ; Greenwood the Great 3 , 1045 , 1046 , 1048 , 1080 , 1082 , 1084 , 1085 , 1094 ; Taur e - Ndaedelos 1134 ; Elven - king ’s halls in 255 , 547 ; Narrows 1094 ; Northern Mirkwood 240 ; Southern Mirkwood 352 , 380 , see also East Lórien ; see also Woodmen 
  Mirror of Galadriel 361–4 , 376 , 731 , 995 , 1016 , 1092 
  Mirrormere ( Kheled - zâram ) 283 , 316 , 317 , 318 , 321 , 322 , 333 , 334 , 356 , 378 , 547 , 1071 , 1074 
  Miruvor 290 , 295 , 310 
  Misty Mountains ( Mountains of Mist ) 3 , 11 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 136 , 149 , 165 , 186–7 , 190 , 200 , 204 , 208 , 224 , 227 , 228 , 231 , 239 , 240 , 250 , 251 , 258 , 262 , 274 , 275 , 276 , 281–7 passim , 295 , 296 , 297 , 300 , 301 , 309 , 331 , 333 , 337 , 341 , 342 , 348 , 353 , 380 , 400 , 415 , 429 , 441 , 450 , 452 , 458 , 462 , 468 , 469 , 475 , 481 , 499 , 526 , 552 , 890 , 982 , 1023 , 1039 , 1040 , 1043 , 1053 , 1054 , 1058 , 1063 , 1064 , 1070 , 1071 , 1082 , 1084 , 1085 , 1087 , 1089 , 1090 , 1127 , 1129 , 1131 
  Mitheithel see Hoarwell 
  Mithlond see Grey Havens 
  Mithrandir see Gandalf 
  Mithril [ truesilver ] 317 , 318 , 322 , 753 , 1071 , 1082 ; Moria - silver 317 ; mithril coat ( mail ) 13 , 277–8 , 317–18 , 336 , 731 , 889 , 902 , 918 , 954 , 955 , 986 , 1094 
  Moon ( Ithil ) 684 ; and livery of Minas Morgul 903 , 913 ; and Shire calendar 1107 ; new after Lothlórien 384 , 385 , 388–9 ; White Face , so called by Gollum 616 , 629 , 630 , 686 , 687 
  Morannon [ black gate ] ( the Black Gate(s ) of Mordor , Sauron ’s gate ) 243 , 253 , 373 , 619 , 625 , 628 , 630 , 631 , 634–9 passim , 642 , 646 , 648 , 649 , 652 , 691 , 692 , 694 , 702 , 816 , 819 , 883–91 passim , 928 , 933 , 949 , 962 , 963 , 1049 , 1093 
  Mordor ( Black Country , Black Land , Dark Country , Land of Shadow , Nameless Land , etc . ) 43–4 , 50 , 51 , 58 , 147 , 168 , 176 , 185 , 186 , 193 , 214 , 222 , 223 , 226 , 241–5 passim , 248 , 250–5 passim , 259 , 262 , 267 , 275 , 277 , 288 , 324 , 368 , 373 , 386 , 390 , 395 , 396 , 398 , 399 , 401 , 403 , 406 , 407 , 415 , 419 , 425 , 433 , 436 , 452 , 460 , 472 , 496 , 497 , 498 , 511 , 516 , 527 , 555 , 580 , 582 , 584 , 585 , 589 , 595 , 600 , 603 , 604 , 609 , 616 , 625 , 628–32 passim , 636–9 passim , 642–7 passim , 651 , 665 , 682 , 691 , 694 , 699 , 702 , 707 , 710 , 711 , 730 , 733 , 748 , 764 , 781 , 796 , 799 , 801 , 807 , 815 , 822 , 828 , 848 , 856 , 861 , 874 , 876 , 878 , 881 , 882 , 885–91 passim , 897–901 passim , 905 , 907 , 911 , 912 , 915 , 917–22 passim , 926–9 passim , 933 , 935 , 945 , 947 , 948 , 949 , 952 , 954 , 957 , 966 , 996 , 1018 , 1037 , 1045 , 1048 , 1049 , 1051 , 1053 , 1055 , 1056 , 1060 , 1070 , 1078 , 1083–90 passim , 1131 , 1132 ; allies of 875 , see also names of allies , e.g. Haradrim ; captains of 1131 ; gates of see Morannon ; host(s ) of 779 , 798 , 823 , 838 , 847 , 848 , 891 , 948 ; language of see Black Speech ; slaves of 814 , 968 ; walls of see Ephel Dúath , Ered Lithui ; see also Darkness ; Nazgûl ; Orcs ; Shadow 
  Morgai 899 , 900 , 916 , 917 , 920–4 , 927 , 1094 
  Morgoth ( Dark Power of the North , Darkness in the North , the Great Enemy , the Shadow ) [ evil Vala , prime Enemy ] 193 , 356 , 476 , 486 , 914 , 1033 , 1034 , 1035 , 1041 , 1071 , 1072 , 1082 , 1128 , 1131 , 1137 ; servant of see Sauron 
  Morgul - knife 195 , 198 , 203 , 210 , 222 , 988 
  Morgul - lord see Witch - king 
  Morgul Pass 885 , 900 
  Morgul - road ( Morgul - way ) 916 , 920 , 923 , 1093 
  Morgul - spells 246 
  Morgul Vale ( Imlad Morgul [ Imlad = deep valley ] , Valley of Living Death , Valley of the Wraiths , etc . ) 253 , 694 , 697 , 699 , 704 , 709 , 710 , 711 , 717 , 720 , 724 , 734 , 812 , 885 , 887 , 935 , 958 , 969 , 1053 , 1094 
  Morgulduin 697 , 704 , 705 
  Moria ( Mines of Moria , Khazad - dûm , the Black Pit , Dwarf - kingdom , halls of Durin , etc . ) 240 , 241 , 242 , 268 , 283 , 287 , 295 , 296 , 297 , 300 , 303 , 306 , 310–23 passim , 333–8 passim , 344 , 349 , 355 , 356 , 359 , 360 , 368 , 383 , 384 , 387 , 400 , 416 , 435 , 436 , 446 , 472 , 501 , 502 , 535 , 548 , 562 , 570 , 644 , 658 , 663 , 670 , 677 , 759 , 934 , 1071–6 passim , 1079 , 1082 , 1083 , 1084 , 1087–92 passim , 1096 , 1118 , 1137 ; Dwarrowdelf 283 , 315 , 1137 ; bridge of ( Bridge of Khazad - dûm , Durin ’s Bridge ) 322 , 328–31 , 356 , 360 , 501 , 1092 ; doors of ( Doors of Durin , Elven Door , Hollin gate , West - gate ) [ west entrance to Moria , made by dwarves but controlled by spell of Celebrimbor ] 297–311 passim , 322 , 1082 , 1091 , 1092 , 1120 , 1122 ; First Deep 328 ; First Hall 328 , 329 , 331 ; Great Gates ( Dimrill Gate , East - gate ) 297 , 315 , 318 , 321 , 322 , 323 , 327 , 328 , 331 , 332 , 333 , 334 , 335 , 338 , 985 , 1073 , 1075 , 1088 ; lord of 303 ; name 1137 ; North - end ( Twenty - first hall ) 321 , 323 ; Second Hall 328–9 ; Seventh Level of 323 ; Third deep , upper armouries 322 ; Walls of 301–3 ; see also Book of Mazarbul ; Chamber of Mazarbul ; Dwarves of Moria 
  Moria , Mountains of 333 , 1096 ; see also Caradhras ; Celebdil ; Fanuidhol 
  Moria - silver see Mithril 
  Morthond ( Blackroot ) 770 , 788 , 849 , 1115 ; archers of 858 ; uplands of 770 
  Morthond Vale ( Blackroot Vale ) 770 , 788 ; men of 788–9 
  Morwen ‘ Steelsheen ’ 1069 , 1070 
  Mound of the Riders 551–2 , 596 , 773 
  Mounds see Barrows 
  Mount Doom ( Orodruin , Amon Amarth , Mountain of Fire , etc . ) 61 , 62 , 63 , 242 , 243 , 245 , 280 , 285 , 401 , 402 , 624 , 644 , 682 , 808 , 899 , 900 , 905 , 911 , 914 , 916 , 917 , 918 , 920 , 923 , 924 , 927 , 933 , 936–7 , 950 , 1037 , 1055 , 1083 , 1089 , 1094 , 1134 ; name ( Orodruin ) 1134 ; see also Crack(s ) of Doom ; Sammath Naur 
  Mount Everwhite see Oiolossë 
  Mount Fang see Orthanc 
  Mount Mindolluin ( Mindolluin ) 600 , 684 , 751 , 752 , 760 , 771 , 808 , 814 , 826 , 829 , 834 , 836 , 848 , 957 , 970 , 972 , 976 
  Mountain and the Wood see Erebor and Lothlórien [ or Dwarves and Elves generally ] 
  Mountain Wall (= Pelóri ) 236 
  Mountains of Gondor see White Mountains 
  Mountains of Lune see Blue Mountains 
  Mountains of Moria see Moria , Mountains of 
  Mountains of Shadow see Ephel Dúath 
  Mountains of Terror (= Ered Gorgoroth ) 193 , 723 
  Mouth of Sauron ( Lieutenant of the Tower , Messenger ) 888–92 passim 
  Mugwort , surname 155 
  Mugwort , Mr. 161 
  Mûmak ( pl . mûmakil ) see Oliphaunt 
  Mundburg see Minas Tirith 
  Muzgash 905 
  Náin , father of Dáin II 1074 , 1075 , 1079 
  Náin I 1072 , 1079 , 1087 
  Náin II 1079 
  Naith of Lothlórien ( Tongue , Gore ) 347 , 350 , 372 , 373 , 377 
  Náli 322 
  Nameless Enemy , One see Sauron 
  Nameless Land see Mordor 
  Nameless Pass see Cirith Ungol 
  Nameless , gnawing things 501 
  Nan Curunír ( Wizard ’s Vale , Valley of Saruman ) 487 , 526 , 552 , 553–4 , 563 , 565 , 571 , 589 
  Nan - tasarion see Tasarinan 
  Nanduhirion see Dimrill Dale 
  Nár 1073 
  Narchost see Towers of the Teeth 
  Nardol 747 , 805 , 834 
  Nargothrond 316 , 357 , 1042 , 1082 , 1115 , 1128 
  Narmacil I 1038 , 1044 , 1045 , 1046 
  Narmacil II 1038 , 1048 , 1049 , 1050 , 1086 
  Narrow Ice (= Helcaraxë ) 234 
  Narsil ( sword that was broken , sword of Elendil ) [ red and white flame ] 170 , 171 , 243 , 244 , 246 , 247 , 248 , 268 , 276–7 , 433 , 438 , 511 , 534 , 658 , 664 , 677 , 780 , 848 , 1043 , 1057 , 1085 , 1089 ; reforged 276–7 , see also Andúril 
  Narvi 306 
  Narya ( the Third Ring , the Ring of Fire ) 1030 , 1085 
  Naugrim see Dwarves 
  Nazgûl ( Ringwraiths , Black Riders , Fell Riders , Black Men , the Nine , Nine Riders , Nine Lords , Messengers of Mordor , Winged Messenger , Shriekers , etc . ) 51 , 69 , 74–6 , 78 , 79 , 80 , 83–97 passim , 99 , 102 , 106 , 107 , 108 , 127 , 132 , 147 , 152 , 164–9 passim , 172 , 173 , 176 , 177 , 180 , 183 , 188 , 189 , 190 , 194–202 passim , 209–15 passim , 220–4 passim , 244 , 245 , 249 , 250 , 254–67 passim , 273 , 274 , 275 , 278 , 279 , 295 , 387 , 388 , 446 , 451 , 452 , 472 , 498 , 501 , 566 , 593 , 595 , 599 , 600 , 629–35 passim , 645 , 692 , 703 , 737 , 738 , 747 , 764 , 766 , 773 , 793 , 809 , 810 , 816 , 820 , 821 , 824 , 860 , 864 , 879 , 885–8 passim , 906 , 913 , 915 , 918–19 , 925–6 , 938 , 946–51 passim , 990 , 1014 , 1027 , 1049 , 1051 , 1053 , 1083–9 passim , 1093 ; cry of 607 , 609 , 629–30 , 766 , 808–9 , 915 , 916 , 919 , 925 ; city of see Minas Morgul ; darkness of see Black Breath ; lord of see Witch - king ; mounted on winged creatures 387 , 446 , 593 , 595 , 599 , 629–30 , 645 , 809 , 810 , 816 , 864 , 913 , 915 , 916 , 918–19 , 938 , 946 , 948 , 1091 , 1092 ; senses of 75 , 189 , 222 , 630 
  Necromancer see Sauron 
  Neekerbreekers 183 
  Neldoreth ( Taur - na - neldor ) 193 , 469 , 1058 
  Nen Hithoel 368 , 393 , 1046 
  Nenuial see Evendim , Lake 
  Nenya ( the Ring of Adamant ) 365 , 366 , 388 , 985 , 1028 , 1085 
  New Age 979 
  New Reckoning 1112 
  New Row 1022 
  New Year 952 ; of the Elves 1094 , 1112 
  Nicotiana see Pipe - weed 
  Night of Naught 234 
  Nimbrethil 233 
  Nimloth see White Tree 
  Nimrodel , elf 339–41 passim , 1087 , 1127 ; Lay of 824 ; name 1127 ; people of 824 , 872 
  Nimrodel , river 338 , 339 , 341 , 342 , 345 , 346 , 347 , 384 , 1092 
  Nimrodel , Bridge of 339 
  Nimrodel , falls of 340 , 341 , 344 
  Nindalf ( Wetwang ) 373 , 1113 
  Nine ( Nine Riders , Nine Servants ) see Nazgûl 
  Nine Rings see Rings of Power 
  Nine Walkers ( Nine Companions ) see Company of the Ring 
  Niphredil 350 , 351 , 1060 , 1063 
  Noakes 22 , 23 
  Nob 153 , 154 , 165 , 168 , 169 , 173 , 174 , 179 , 180 , 990 , 991 , 994 
  Nogrod 1071 
  Noldor see Eldar 
  Noman - lands 373 , 631 
  Norbury see Fornost 
  Nori 229 , 1079 
  North , the ( Northerland , etc . ) 8 , 150 , 198 , 221 , 243 , 248 , 252 , 266 , 340 , 374 , 432 , 547 , 678 , 748 ; palantír of 1040 , 1042 ; see also names of lands in the North of Middle - earth , e.g. Beleriand 
  North Downs 244 , 993 , 1040 , 1041 , 1051 
  North - gate see Buckland 
  North Kingdom ( Northern Kingdom ) see Arnor 
  North Moors 44 , 45 
  North Road see Greenway 
  North Stair see Stair , the , by Rauros 
  North - tooks of Long Cleeve 1103 
  Northern Fences , of Lothlórien 370 
  Northfarthing 9 , 44 , 288 , 649 , 1016 , 1024 , 1088 ; see also Battle of Greenfields 
  Northmen 1045 , 1046 , 1072 
  North - way see West Road 
  Númenor ( Westernesse ) , island realm 4 , 15 , 52 , 194 , 236 , 242 , 597 , 676 , 678 , 679 , 682 , 782 , 789 , 825 , 868 , 962 , 1035–7 , 1042 , 1043 , 1047 , 1082 , 1083 , 1084 , 1128 ; Elenna , Isle of 1035 ; Land of the Star 1048 ; calendar of see Kings ’ Reckoning ; Downfall of ( Akallabêth ) 242 , 1035 , 1108 , 1129 ; Kings and Queens of 194 , 1035 , 1037 , 1049 , 1063 ; King ’s Court 1110 ; languages of 1128–9 , see also Adûnaic ; men of see Númenóreans ; name 1128 ; Seeing Stones of see Palantír 
  Númenóreans , of the island realm ( Men of the Sea ) 8 , 476 , 485 , 679 , 1048 , 1117 , 1128 ; the Faithful ( Exiles ) 1036 , 1037 , 1084 ; Black Númenóreans ( King ’s Northmen ) 888 , 1044–5 ; Númenóreans who became Nazgûl 692 ; in Middle - earth after the Downfall ( Kings of Northmen , Men of race or blood of Númenor , Westernesse , etc . ) 4 , 52 , 233 , 242 , 244 , 245 , 259 , 268 , 343 , 399 , 400 , 496 , 628 , 641 , 659 , 670 , 672 , 677–8 , 759 , 810 , 824 , 832 , 900 , 965 , 1048 , 1049 , 1052 , 1131 , see also Dúnedain ; Fathers of see Dúnedain ; Rulers ( Kings , Chieftains ) of the Realms in Exile 149 , 221 , 967 , 1033 , 1037–9 , 1046 , 1061 ; works of Númenóreans , of Westernesse specifically mentioned see Minas Tirith ; Orthanc ; Seat of Seeing ; Swords , from barrow 
  Núrnen , Lake ( inland sea ) 636 , 923 , 968 
  Oath of Eorl see Eorl the Young : Oath of 
  Oathbreakers see Dead , the 
  Ohtar 243 , 1085 
  Óin , son of Glóin 1079 
  Glóin , son of Gróin 229 , 241 , 322 , 1079 
  Oiolossë ( Mount Everwhite ) 377 , 378 
  Old Forest 22 , 98 , 99 , 103 , 107 , 108 , 109–21 passim , 128 , 129 , 130 , 135 , 136 , 147 , 151 , 177 , 219 , 265 , 442 , 468 , 472 , 996 , 998 , 1040 , 1091 ; see also Bonfire Glade 
  Old Grange 1016 
  Old Guesthouse 768 
  Old man at Door of the Dead 798 
  Old Man Willow see Willow , Old Man 
  Old Road see East - West Road 
  Old Toby 8 
  Old Winyards 38 , 68 
  Old Words and Names in the Shire 15 
  Old World , North - west of 2 
  Oldbuck family 9 , 98 , 1043 , 1087 , 1104 , 1138 ; see also Brandybuck family 
  Oldbuck , Gorhendad 98 , 1104 
  Oliphaunt ( mûmak ) 661 , 662 , 675 , 811 , 828 , 843 , 845 , 846 , 848 , 858 , 937 , 957 , 646 , 647 , 662 , 987 
  Olog - hai see Trolls 
  Olórin see Gandalf 
  Ondoher 1038 , 1039 , 1049 , 1050 , 1086 
  One , the (= Eru , Ilúvatar ) 1037 , 1063 
  One Ring see Ring , the 
  Onodrim see Ents 
  Orcrist 280 
  Orcs ( gorgûn , yrch ) 5 , 54 , 55 , 57 , 255–6 , 298 , 309 , 310 , 317 , 327 , 342 , 344 , 395 , 396 , 397 , 413 , 414 , 415 , 418–28 passim , 431–41 passim , 444–61 passim , 464 , 466 , 481 , 489–90 , 586 , 646 , 657 , 729 , 755 , 766 , 779 , 924–6 , 955 , 979 , 1040 , 1057 , 1088 , 1092 ; goblins 181 , 337 , 389 , 444 ; of Cirith Ungol , Minas Morgul 735–6 , 742 , 897–905 passim , 910–16 passim , 1093 ; from Durthang 930–2 , 1094 ; of Moria , Misty Mountains 11 , 13 , 44 , 52 , 227 , 296 , 322 , 324–5 , 329 , 330 , 331 , 334–7 passim , 345–6 , 349 , 383 , 400 , 415 , 422 , 446 , 447 , 449 , 451 , 452 , 454 , 677 , 955 , 1043 , 1054 , 1064 , 1068–9 , 1070 , 1073–9 passim , 1085 , 1087 , 1131 ; of Mordor ( Sauron , Orcs of the Eye , Enemy ) 222 , 386–7 , 390 , 437 , 446 , 451–4 passim , 498 , 604 , 616 , 619 , 620 , 621 , 625 , 628 , 636 , 637 , 642 , 651 , 659 , 665 , 702 , 713 , 717 , 724 , 725 , 742 , 800 , 820 , 821 , 822 , 828–35 passim , 837 , 839 , 848 , 883 , 884 , 885 , 892 , 921 , 923 , 924–6 , 928–31 passim , 942 , 949 , 1054 , 1131 ; Uruks of Mordor 324 , 325 , 738 , 932 , 1053 , 1131 ; Orcs of Saruman 260 , 261 , 472–5 passim , 483 , 486 , 498 , 521 , 527 , 529–47 passim , 551 , 553 , 560–74 passim , 588 ; Uruk - hai ( Isengarders , with device of White Hand ) 415–16 , 422 , 425 , 437 , 440 , 445–57 passim , 539–40 , 984 , 1131 ; alphabets of 1118 ; half - Orcs 566 ; languages of 445 , 1114 , 1117 , 1131 , 1134 ; made in mockery of Elves 486 ; poisoned blades of 336 ; and sunlight 329 , 334 , 425 ; see also names of individual orcs , e.g. Grishnákh 
  Ori 229 , 241 , 322 , 1079 
  Orkish see Orcs : languages of 
  Ornendil 1047 , 1086 
  Orod - na - Thôn see Dorthonion 
  Orodreth 1039 
  Orodruin see Mount Doom 
  Orofarnë 483 , 484 
  Oromë ( Araw , Béma ) [ a Vala ] 838 , 1039 , 1065 , 1116 ; wild kine of Araw 755 , 1039 
  Orophin 343 , 344 , 346 
  Orthanc ( Cunning Mind , Mount Fang ) 127 , 257 , 258 , 260 , 261 , 400 , 435 , 437 , 474 , 481 , 555 , 556 , 558 , 562 , 566–80 passim , 582–7 passim , 594 , 595 , 598 , 599 , 644 , 780 , 822 , 979 , 980 , 983 , 1090 , 1091 , 1093 ; devilry of ( blasting fire ) 537 , 538–9 ; key(s ) of 583 , 586 , 1054 , 1067 ; Treegarth of 979 
  Orthanc - stone see Palantír 
  Osgiliath ( Citadel of the Stars ) 244 , 245 , 390 , 401 , 417 , 598 , 641 , 648 , 666 , 677 , 697 , 702 , 707 , 764 , 765 , 812 , 814 , 816 , 817 , 819 , 823 , 824 , 846 , 882 , 884 , 957 , 963 , 1037 , 1044 , 1046 , 1047 , 1048 , 1053 , 1084 , 1086 , 1087 , 1091 , 1093 , 1113 ; bridges of 367 , 750 ; Dome of Stars 598 ; fords of 750 ; palantír of see palantír ; Tower of the Dome of Osgiliath 1046 ; East Osgiliath 817 
  Ossir , Seven Rivers of 469 
  Ossiriand 469 
  Ostoher 1038 , 1085 , 1144 
  Otherworld 234 
  Outlands 770–1 ; Captains of 769 
  Outside , from whence the Dark Lord came 131 
  Outside ( Outsiders ) , relative to Bree or the Shire 10 , 150 , 154 , 992 
  Over - heaven 599 
  Overhill 44 
  Overlithe 1106 , 1109 
  palantír [ far - seer , pl . Palantíri ] ( Seeingstones , Seven Stones ) 597–600 , 693 , 694 , 748 , 753 , 757 , 856 , 878 , 1037 , 1084 ; Seven Stones 757 ; of Amon Sûl 598 , 1040 , 1042 ; of Annúminas 598 , 1042 ; of Arnor 1086 ; of Gondor 597 ; of Minas Ithil ( of Isildur ; Ithil - stone ) 598 , 854 , 856 , 1051 , 1056 , 1087 , 1090 ; of Minas Tirith ( of Anárion , Minas Anor ; Anor - stone ) 598 , 853 , 854 , 856 , 982 , 1056 ; of the North 1040 , 1042 ; of Orthanc ( Orthanc - stone ) 583–4 , 585 , 590–600 passim , 644 , 747 , 780 , 815 , 879 , 982 , 1067 , 1090 ; of Osgiliath 598 , 1046 , 1086 ; of the Tower Hills ( Elendil ’s stone ) 598 , 1042 ; stones of Númenor 693 , 694 
  Parth Galen 395 , 405 , 413 , 416–19 passim , 658 , 773 , 955 , 1092 
  Party Field 26 , 31 , 36 , 1023 , 1112 
  Party Tree 26 , 28–9 , 1017 
  Paths of the Dead 503 , 775 , 779 , 781 , 783 , 796 , 797 , 800 , 847 , 867 , 874–5 , 877 , 1068 , 1093 ; see also Dead , the ; Door of the Dead 
  Pelargir 789 , 873–7 passim , 881 , 897 , 971 , 1044 , 1047 , 1048 , 1055 , 1084 , 1086 , 1093 , 1116 , 1129 
  Pelendur 1039 , 1049 , 1052 
  Pelennor [ fenced land ] ( Pelennor Fields , Fields of the Pelennor , Field of Gondor ) 750 , 763 , 807 , 808 , 809 , 816 , 817 , 821 , 823 , 836 , 837 , 839 , 845 , 847 , 848 , 878 , 883 , 919 , 957 , 965 , 1062 , 1093 ; wall of see Rammas Echor ; see also Battle of the Pelennor Fields 
  Pennies 25 , 179 
  People of the Great Journey see Eldar 
  People of the Star see Eldar 
  Peredhil see Half - elven 
  Peregrin , son of Paladin see Took , Peregrin 
  Periain see Hobbits 
  Phial of Galadriel ( star - glass , Lady ’s glass ) 376 , 426 , 707 , 708 , 712 , 720–2 , 725 , 729 , 730 , 731 , 733 , 897 , 902 , 912 , 915 , 916 , 926 , 938 , 945 , 952 , 1030 
  Pickthorn , Tom 992 
  Pinnath Gelin [ green ridges ] 771 , 790 , 846 , 849 , 965 
  Pipe - weed ( leaf ) 28–9 , 558 , 1087 ; Nicotiana 8 ; ( sweet ) galenas 9 , 869 ; westmansweed 869 ; see also varieties of pipe - weed , e.g. Longbottom Leaf 
  Plague 5 , 1041 , 1048 , 1064 , 1086 
  Plough , the see Sickle , the 
  Ponies see names of individual ponies , e.g. Bill 
  Poros 1049 , 1054 , 1088 ; crossing of 1054 
  Postmaster , in Shire 10 
  Prancing Pony , The ( the Inn of Bree ) 8 , 148 , 150–80 passim , 219 , 327 , 990 , 991 , 994 , 1091 
  Precious see Ring , the 
  Proudfoot family 28 , 29 , 30 
  Proudfoot , Bodo 1100 
  Proudfoot , Linda née Baggins 1100 
  Proudfoot , Bodo 30 , 39 , 1100 
  Proudfoot , Olo 1100 
  Proudfoot , Sancho 39 , 1100 
  Puddifoot family 92 
  Púkel - men 794 , 795 , 831 
  Quendi ( Elves ) 1137 
  Quenya ( High - elven , Ancient Speech , Ancient Tongue , noble tongue , etc . ) 81 , 85 , 377 , 863 , 864 , 1038 , 1039 , 1107 , 1110–23 passim , 1126 , 1127–8 , 1131 , 1137 
  Quest 61 , 66 , 269 , 337 , 356 , 357 , 358 , 367 , 378 , 394 , 407 , 414 , 426 , 672 , 677 , 732 , 735 , 911 , 940 , 947 , 949 ; of Bilbo and Thorin , i.e. of Erebor 11 , 13 , 1078 ; of Mount Doom 280 
  Quickbeam ( Bregalad ) 482–5 passim , 558 , 564 , 568 , 979 , 980 
  Radagast the Brown 256 , 257 , 258 , 261 , 274 , 1091 
  Radbug 905 
  Rammas Echor ( Rammas ) 748 , 749 , 750 , 816–23 passim , 830 , 834 , 836 , 837 , 848 , 849 , 970 , 972 
  Rangers see Dúnedain 
  Rath Celerdain see Lampwrights ’ Street 
  Rath Dínen ( Silent Street ) 752 , 826 , 827 , 829 , 851 , 852 , 855 , 967 , 972 , 975 , 1062 , 1098 
  Rauros ( Falls , cataracts of Rauros ) 368 , 373 , 380 , 389 , 394 , 397 , 400 , 402 , 407 , 415 , 417 , 418 , 436 , 658 , 663 , 664 , 667 , 677 , 759 , 879 , 955 , 971 , 1127 
  Reckoning of Rivendell see Rivendell : calendar of 
  Reckoning of Years 15 
  Red Arrow 798 , 799 , 817 , 835 
  Red Book of the Periannath 14 
  Red Book of Westmarch ( Bilbo Baggins ’ book , diary ) 1 , 2 , 7 , 13 , 14–15 , 31 , 32 , 40 , 105 , 231 , 269 , 270 , 273 , 277 , 278 , 458 , 988 , 1016 , 1026–7 , 1029 , 1081 , 1097 , 1105 , 1107 , 1108 , 1111 , 1133 , 1136 , 1138 
  Red star in the South 274 
  Redhorn see Caradhras 
  Redhorn Gate ( Redhorn Pass ) 274 , 283 , 285 , 286 , 287 , 294 , 295 , 356 , 985 , 1043 , 1073 , 1085 , 1087 
  Remmirath , the Netted Stars 81 
  Reunited ( restored ) Kingdom 14 , 1112 
  Rhosgobel 256 , 274 
  Rhovanion 1046–53 passim , 1065 , 1086 , 1090 ; kings of 1063 
  Rhudaur 201 , 1039 , 1040 , 1041 , 1086 ; Hillmen of 1040 ; men of 201 
  Rhûn 248 , 755 ; men of 949 
  Rhûn , Sea of ( Inland Sea ) 248 , 755 , 765 , 1039 , 1045 , 1046 , 1071 
  Rhymes of Lore 597 
  Riddermark see Rohan 
  Riddle - game 11–12 , 54 
  Riders of Rohan see Rohirrim 
  Rimmon see Min - Rimmon 
  Ring , the ( One Ring , the One , Great Ring , Ring of Power , Ruling Ring , Master - ring , Ring of the Enemy , etc . ) 10–13 , 31–6 , 40 , 46–65 passim , 75 , 78 , 104 , 105 , 132–3 , 141 , 157 , 160–1 , 170 , 171 , 177 , 189 , 195 , 197 , 199 , 208 , 219–24 passim , 228 , 231–2 , 241–54 passim , 256 , 260 , 264–70 passim , 275 , 276 , 277 , 281 , 295 , 296 , 297 , 312 , 318 , 337 , 364 , 365 , 366 , 369 , 397–406 passim , 414 , 455 , 471 , 490 , 495–8 passim , 500 , 618 , 624 , 630–1 , 634 , 638 , 665 , 671 , 672 , 677 , 680–1 , 685 , 692–3 , 703–7 passim , 712 , 732–5 passim , 748 , 813–14 , 824 , 876 , 878 , 879 , 880 , 898–901 passim , 904 , 907 , 911 , 912 , 918 , 919 , 935–47 passim , 974 , 987 , 1024 , 1027 , 1037 , 1062 , 1063 , 1080 , 1082 , 1083 , 1084 , 1087–90 passim , 1094 , 1106 ; Isildur ’s Bane 243 , 246 , 247 , 248 , 658 , 663 , 669 , 671 , 759 ; Ring of Isildur 52 , 249 , 252–3 , 276 ; called Precious by Gollum ( and in referring to Gollum by Frodo and Sam ) , Bilbo , and Isildur 11–12 , 33 , 34 , 55 , 56 , 253 , 613 , 614 , 616 , 618 , 624 , 628 , 630 , 633–40 passim , 643 , 686–90 passim , 713 , 714 , 724 , 943 , 944 , 946 ; inscription ( fire - writing ) 50 , 618 , 1121–2 , 1131–2 ; War of see War of the Ring 
  Ring , Isildur ( Companions ) of the see Isildur of the Ring 
  Ring of Barahir 1042 , 1043 , 1057 , 1090 
  Ring - verse v , 50 ; see also Ring , the : inscription 
  Rings of Power ( Great Rings , Elvenrings ) 47 , 48 , 55 , 56 , 59 , 242 , 250 , 254 , 562 , 1029 , 1083 ; lesser rings 47 ; Three Rings ( of Elves ) 50 , 51 , 52 , 59 , 242 , 245 , 250 , 252 , 253 , 268–9 , 365–6 , 971 , 985 , 1033 , 1062 , 1083 , 1084 , 1085 , 1096 , see also Narya , Nenya , Vilya ; Seven Rings ( of Dwarves ) 50 , 51 , 59 , 241 , 250 , 252 , 268 , 366 , 1073 , 1076 , 1088 ; Thrór ’s Ring 1073 , 1076 , 1077 , 1079 ; Nine Rings ( of Mortal Men ) 50 , 51 , 59 , 250 , 252 , 366 ; see also Elvensmiths : of Eregion 
  Ringló 875 , 1093 
  Ringló Vale 770 
  Ringwraiths see Nazgûl 
  Rivendell ( Imladris , house of Elrond , Last Homely House ) 3 , 14 , 15 , 66 , 80 , 83 , 106 , 166 , 170 , 172 , 178 , 179 , 187 , 188 , 190 , 191 , 194 , 200 , 202 , 203 , 209 , 210 , 211 , 214 , 219–39 passim , 244 , 246 , 260 , 264 , 266 , 270–83 passim , 290 , 295 , 303 , 310 , 311 , 339 , 348 , 349 , 350 , 358 , 359 , 366 , 398 , 403 , 435 , 441 , 453 , 458 , 472 , 495 , 496 , 504 , 562 , 590 , 598 , 650 , 652 , 657 , 658 , 663 , 664 , 677 , 729 , 732 , 781 , 784 , 872 , 927 , 950 , 972 , 974 , 978 , 984–7 passim , 1026 , 1027 , 1038 , 1039 , 1040 , 1043 , 1051 , 1057 , 1058 , 1060 , 1061 , 1062 , 1078 , 1080 , 1083 , 1084 , 1089–96 passim , 1134 ; calendar of ( Reckoning of Rivendell ) 1107 , 1108 , 1112 ; name 1134 ; Hall of Fire 230 , 277 , 280 , 729 
  River Running ( Celduin ) 1046 , 1053 , 1072 
  River - daughter see Goldberry 
  River - woman 119 
  Road , as idea 35 , 73–4 , 285 , 987 
  Roads see names of roads , e.g. East - West Road 
  Rob 180 
  Rohan ( Riddermark [ Riddena - mearc , land of the knights ] , the Riddermark , etc . ) 15 , 246 , 261 , 262 , 348 , 374 , 381 , 400 , 417 , 421–4 passim , 427 , 431–8 passim , 443 , 453 , 459 , 474 , 481 , 488 , 490 , 497–500 passim , 504 , 507 , 508 , 509 , 513–18 passim , 521–6 passim , 529 , 533 , 535 , 537 , 539 , 544 , 564 , 566 , 569 , 574 , 575 , 579 , 589 , 600 , 609 , 667 , 673 , 678 , 747 , 748 , 749 , 761 , 765 , 766 , 767 , 774 , 777 , 778 , 786 , 792 , 795 , 799 , 800 , 803 , 804 , 817 , 821 , 822 , 829 , 831 , 833 , 849 , 851 , 862 , 867 , 868 , 872 , 886 , 955 , 969 , 974 , 976 , 977 , 978 , 984 , 992 , 1007 , 1033 , 1054 , 1055 , 1064–71 , 1080 , 1088–97 passim , 1110 , 1113 , 1115 , 1117 , 1127 , 1129 , 1131 , 1135 ; barrows , mounds of see Barrowfield ; East - mark 436 ; East Wall of 423 , 437 ; West Marches 513 ; emblem of ( white horse , great horse running free usually upon green ) 802 , 838 , 839 , 847 , 891 , 953 , 1071 ; horses of , characteristics 262 , 439 , 454 , 457 , 801 , 881 ; horses of , theft or tribute 262 , 431 , 436 , 1070 ; kings , lords of ( Mark - wardens ) 435 , 803 , 977 , 1068–71 , 1088 ; name 1113 , 1115 ; names in 1117 ; Riders , men of see Rohirrim ; see also East Dales ; Eastfold ; Gap of Rohan ; Helm ’s Deep ; Westfold ; Wold of Rohan ; etc . 
  Roheryn 778 , 782 
  Rohirrim ( Riders , men of Rohan , Riders , host , knights of the Riddermark , Riders of Théoden , etc . ) [ Rider : in Rohan ( ridda ) , a Knight of the king ’s trained cavalry ] 15 , 262 , 296 , 381 , 421 , 422 , 423 , 426–7 , 430 , 431 , 432 , 435 , 438 , 441 , 443 , 452–9 passim , 472 , 473 , 497 , 507 , 508 , 517 , 518 , 524 , 527–37 passim , 540–6 passim , 549 , 551 , 555 , 576 , 577 , 579 , 580 , 584 , 588 , 595 , 609 , 678 , 679 , 750 , 751 , 767 , 773–84 passim , 791–4 passim , 798 , 799 , 802 , 803 , 804 , 807 , 815 , 816 , 818 , 819 , 821 , 830 , 833–9 passim , 843–7 passim , 861 , 862 , 868 , 874 , 881 , 882 , 883 , 897 , 948 , 954 , 955 , 959 , 965 , 966 , 969 , 975 , 976 , 1039 , 1053 , 1054 , 1055 , 1060 , 1064–9 passim , 1087 , 1092 , 1093 , 1127 , 1130 , 1136 ; Eorlingas ( Eorlings ) 517 , 518 , 523 , 525 , 527 , 540 , 797 , 803 , 840 , 1064 , 1129 ; Forgoil , Strawheads 537 , 1130 ; horseboys ( horsebreeders ) 448 , 451 , 454 ; Horsemen ( Horse - men , Horse - lords ) 262 , 287 , 381 , 400 , 427 , 488 , 489 , 497 , 507 , 566 , 832 , 834 , 987 ; Middle Peoples , Men of the Twilight 678–9 ; Northmen 839 ; robbers of the North 537 ; Sons of Eorl 436 , 437 , 800 , 836 ; Whiteskins ( night - eyes ) 449–54 passim ; calendar of 1110 ; horns of 459 , 526 , 539 , 540–1 , 829 , 838 , 844 , 847 , 850 , 976 , 978 , 1053 , 1066–7 , 1093 ; language of 15 , 508 , 555 , 678 , 945 , 1129 , 1130 , 1133 , 1136 ; name 1113 ; writing 1118 
  Rómendacil I ‘ East - victor ’ ( Tarostar ) 1038 , 1044 , 1085 
  Rómendacil II ( Minalcar ) 1038 , 1045 , 1046 , 1047 
  Roper , Andwise ‘ Andy ’ 611 , 1105 
  Roper , Anson 1105 
  Rose , daughter of Holman ‘ the greenhanded ’ 1105 
  Ruffians ( Chief ’s Northmen , Sharkey ’s Northmen ) 1004–18 passim , 1020 , 1022 
  Rules , the , ancient law 9 
  Rules , imposed by Lotho 1000 , 1011 , 1012 
  Rumble , Widow 1024 
  Rúmil 343 , 344 , 346 , 347 , 1117 
  Runes 25 , 170 , 187 , 208 , 234 , 276 , 316 , 319 , 320 , 321 , 334 , 374 , 375 , 415 , 416 , 512 , 651 , 978 , 1073 , 1117–18 ; Cirth 1117 , 1118 , 1123–6 ; see also Angerthas Daeron ; Angerthas Moria ; Daeron ’s Runes 
  Running River see River Running 
  Rushey 98 
  Rushlight , surname 155 
  Sackville - Baggins family ( the S.-B.s ) 21 , 23 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 38 , 66 , 68 , 72 , 103 , 104 , 263 , 273 
  Sackville - Baggins , Lobelia née Bracegirdle 28 , 37–41 passim , 66 , 68–9 , 1013 , 1100 , 1102 , 1021 
  Sackville - Baggins , Lotho ( the Boss , the Chief , Pimple ) 66 , 68 , 69 , 575 , 995 , 998–1013 passim , 1016–21 passim , 1100 , 1102 
  Sackville - Baggins , Lotho 28 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 66 , 1100 , 1102 
  Sammath Naur ( Chambers of Fire ) 942 , 945 , 946 , 947 , 950 , 1094 ; see also Crack(s ) of Doom 
  Sandheaver , surname 155 
  Sandyman the Miller 23 , 24 , 44 , 1013 
  Sandyman , Ted 44–5 , 63 , 325 , 362 , 1012 , 1013 , 1017 
  Sangahyando 1048 
  Sarn Ford 172 , 1000 , 1009 , 1091 , 1098 
  Sarn Gebir 368 , 385 , 386 , 389 , 390 , 391 , 498 , 1092 ; portage - way 390–1 
  Saruman ( Saruman the White , Saruman the Andwise , etc . ) 48 , 58 , 250 , 251 , 252 , 256–62 passim , 265 , 266 , 267 , 287 , 296 , 364 , 416 , 421 , 428 , 430 , 435 , 436 , 437 , 441–9 passim , 456 , 472 , 473 , 474 , 481 , 486–500 passim , 509 , 518 , 520 , 521 , 526 , 527 , 529 , 530 , 536 , 537 , 544 , 545 , 546 , 548 , 551–8 , 560 , 562 , 564 , 566–88 passim , 592–99 passim , 644 , 757 , 780 , 799 , 815 , 867 , 869 , 890 , 979 , 980 , 983 , 984 , 996 , 1005 , 1018–20 , 1054 , 1055 , 1067–70 passim , 1078 , 1085 , 1088 , 1089 , 1090 , 1093 , 1095 , 1096 ; Curunír 1085 ; Saruman of Many Colours 259 ; Saruman Ring - maker 259 ; Sharkey 1004 , 1005 , 1012 , 1013 , 1018 , 1020 , 1022 ; tree - killer 568 ; voice of ( power of persuasion ) 567 , 577 , 578–84 , 980 , 1019 ; host of see Orcs ; Men , in service of Saruman 437 ; treason of Isengard 766 ; see also Isengard ; Orthanc ; White Hand 
  Sauron ( Dark Lord , Enemy , Black One , Black Hand , Black Master , Base Master of Treachery , Dark Power , dark hands of the East , Nameless One , etc . ) 15 , 43 , 47–52 passim , 58–62 passim , 83 , 104 , 131 , 141 , 146 , 170 , 171 , 172 , 177 , 190 , 191 , 193 , 203 , 210 , 220–3 passim , 226 , 231 , 241–5 passim , 248 , 250 , 252–7 passim , 259–62 passim , 265–9 passim , 274 , 275 , 279 , 281 , 288 , 289 , 295 , 296 , 298 , 347 , 348 , 352 , 356 , 358 , 362–9 passim , 378 , 380 , 381 , 389 , 398–402 passim , 427 , 430 , 433–6 passim , 476 , 477 , 485 , 490 , 495 , 496–7 , 499 , 501 , 513 , 550 , 564 , 580 , 583 , 585 , 592–5 passim , 598 , 599 , 604 , 609 , 616 , 618 , 625 , 630–45 passim , 649 , 651 , 658 , 659 , 662–8 passim , 671 , 675–80 passim , 692 , 707 , 710 , 712 , 713 , 714 , 716 , 723 , 724 , 732 , 734 , 737 , 740 , 750 , 755 , 760 , 765 , 780 , 782 , 784 , 799 , 811–18 passim , 822 , 823 , 824 , 829 , 834 , 839 , 840 , 851–7 passim , 861 , 862 , 876–90 passim , 900 , 901 , 919 , 923 , 927 , 928 , 930 , 931 , 935 , 936 , 938 , 942 , 945 , 946 , 948 , 949 , 952 , 958 , 963 , 966 , 971 , 981 , 1035 , 1036 , 1037 , 1044 , 1045 , 1047 , 1048 , 1053–7 passim , 1060 , 1061 , 1062 , 1070 , 1071 , 1072 , 1076 , 1077 , 1078 , 1080 , 1083 , 1084 , 1087 , 1088 , 1089 , 1091 , 1094 , 1095 , 1112 , 1131 , 1132 , 1134 , 1137 ; Necromancer 250;servant of Morgoth 1082 ; name 1134 ; servants , hosts of 222 , 241 , 668 , 789 , 818–19 , 821 , see also Nazgûl , Orcs ; Lord of the Ring 226 ; shadow of 949 ; slaves of 938 ; throne of 935 ; see also Barad - dûr ; Eye , the ; Shadow 
  Sauron ’s Road 941 , 942 
  Scary 1021 
  Scatha the Worm 978 , 1064 , 1065 ; hoard of 1065 
  Sea , the 2 , 4 , 7 , 8 , 45 , 79 , 80 , 108 , 129 , 131 , 141 , 185 , 200 , 202 , 221 , 222 , 225 , 234 , 235 , 242 , 245 , 251 , 266 , 296 , 340 , 341 , 348 , 349 , 364 , 365 , 366 , 371 , 372 , 373 , 381 , 388 , 389 , 400 , 417 , 418 , 423 , 424 , 468 , 473 , 476 , 485 , 501 , 503 , 508 , 515 , 556 , 597 , 598 , 632 , 633 , 650 , 666 , 678 , 679 , 702 , 750 , 763 , 765 , 772 , 788 , 808 , 832 , 838 , 845 , 847 , 849 , 860 , 873 , 875 , 877 , 911 , 920 , 956 , 965 , 967 , 971 , 983 , 986 , 1014 , 1023 , 1030 , 1034–7 passim , 1042–7 passim , 1055 , 1056 , 1060 , 1062 , 1063 , 1065 , 1080 , 1082 , 1085 , 1087 , 1089 , 1096 , 1097 , 1098 , 1108 , 1128 , 1129 ; Great Sea 79 , 80 , 149 , 349 , 351 , 388 , 417 , 556 , 632 , 967 , 1034 ; Sundering Seas 193 , 194 , 372 , 599 ; Western Seas 79 , 316 , 1028 
  Seat of Hearing see Amon Lhaw 
  Seat of Seeing see Amon Hen 
  Second Age 15 , 242 , 1033 , 1036 , 1037 , 1082–4 , 1117–18 
  Secret Fire 330 
  Seeing - stones see Palantír 
  Seen and the Unseen 223 
  Seven Rings see Rings of Power 
  Seven Stars see Elendil : emblems of 
  Seven Stones see Palantír 
  Shadow , the , i.e. the recurring and growing power of evil , especially of Sauron 51 , 59 , 168 , 241 , 262 , 275 , 341 , 348 , 349 , 396 , 401 , 495 , 604 , 605 , 694 , 765 , 766 , 791 , 807 , 814 , 911 , 922 , 936 , 951 , 961 , 963 , 965 , 976 , 1048 , 1060 , 1061 , 1062 , 1063 , 1071 , 1084 , 1094 ; sometimes used as a synonym for Sauron or Mordor ; see also Morgoth 
  Shadow Host see Dead , the 
  Shadowfax 262 , 264 , 435 , 453 , 504 , 505 , 506 , 509 , 513 , 522 , 524 , 525 , 528 , 529 , 542 , 543 , 551 , 570 , 596 , 600 , 747 , 749 , 751 , 752 , 760 , 761 , 762 , 768 , 773 , 793 , 810 , 820 , 829 , 850 , 851 , 864 , 975 , 991 , 993 , 996 , 1030 , 1065 , 1091 , 1117 , 1136 ; name 1136 
  Shadowmere 235 
  Shadows 1034 
  Shadowy Mountains see Ephel Dúath Shagrat ( Captain of the Tower ) 735–42 , 898 , 899 , 902–8 passim , 917 , 919 , 924 , 925 , 1094 
  Sharkey see Saruman 
  Sharkey ’s End 1022 
  Sharkû 1018 , 1132 
  Sharp - ears 144 
  Shathûr see Fanuidhol 
  Shelob ( Hen , Hen Ladyship , the Watcher ) 633 , 644 , 692 , 719–30 passim , 734–41 passim , 898 , 900 , 902 , 905 , 926 , 1090 , 1093 , 1096 ; lair of ( Torech Ungol ) 643 , 709 , 710 , 716–27 passim , 733 , 734 , 736 , 897 , 898 , 910 , 1093 
  Ship , as emblem see Dol Amroth 
  Ship - kings 1038 , 1044 
  Shire , the ( Shire , land of the Halflings ) 2–10 passim , 13 , 14 , 15 , 21–110 passim , 132 , 140 , 147–58 passim , 165 , 167 , 169 , 171 , 172 , 177 , 184 , 188 , 202 , 211 , 221 , 223 , 225 , 228 , 231 , 232 , 238 , 249 , 251 , 254–62 passim , 265 , 270 , 276 , 288 , 317 , 321 , 325 , 336 , 348 , 351 , 359 , 360 , 363 , 388 , 397 , 403 , 472 , 556 , 575 , 586 , 607 , 611 , 644 , 647 , 650 , 657 , 690 , 721 , 729 , 732 , 748 , 754 , 756 , 760 , 763 , 766 , 769 , 773 , 779 , 792 , 807 , 809 , 811 , 870 , 883 , 889 , 908 , 915 , 941 , 947 , 954 , 966 , 974 , 978 , 982 , 986–1031 passim , 1039–44 passim , 1077 , 1078 , 1087–91 passim , 1095–99 passim , 1107 , 1134 ; calendar of see Shire Reckoning ; clocks in 655 ; holidays in 10 , 1025 , 1112 ; Marches of 9 ; Messenger Service 10 ; name 1134 ; ordering of 9–10 ; personal names in 1134–6 ; place - names in 1130 , 1136 , 1138 ; Postmaster 10 ; Quick Post Service 1002 ; records in 14–16 , 1111 ; settlement of 3 , 4 ; Shire - fashion , advice 987 ; Shire - folk , Shire - hobbits 15 , 150 , 151 , 156 , 172 , 270 , 360 , 779 , 792 , 883 , 1007 , 1042 , 1088 , 1096 , etc . ; Shire - historians 1016 ; Shire - moot 9 ; Shire - muster 9 ; Watch 10 ; ‘ sure as Shiretalk ’ 647 ; see also Buckland ; Bywater ; Eastfarthing ; Farthings ; Green Hills ; Hobbiton ; hobbits ; North Moors ; Northfarthing ; Southfarthing ; Three - Farthing Stone ; Tookland ; Westfarthing ; Westmarch ; etc . 
  Shire Reckoning ( Shire - reckoning ) 4 , 8 , 563 , 897 , 952 , 1033 , 1097 , 1099 , 1106–7 , 1109–12 
  Shirriff - houses 1001 , 1002 , 1003 , 1013 , 1022 
  Shirriffs 10 , 1001–4 passim , 1009 , 1021 ; First Shirriff 10 
  Sickle , the ( Plough , Great Bear ) 174 
  Siege of Barad - dûr 1084 
  Silent Street see Rath Dínen 
  Silent Watchers 642 , 707 , 738 
  Silmariën 1035 , 1050 
  Silmaril(s ) ( Jewels , Great Jewel ) 193 , 194 , 234 , 236 , 277 , 712 , 720 , 950 , 1033 , 1034 
  Silmarillion , The 1034 , 1132 
  Silvan Elves ( Silvan folk , Wood - elves , East - elves ) 58 , 60 , 283 , 338–9 , 432 , 1082 , 1087 , 1094 , 1127 ; language of 339 , 342 ; see also names of Silvan Elves , e.g. Haldir 
  Silver Tree see Telperion ; White Tree 
  Silverlode see Celebrant 
  Silvertine see Celebdil 
  Simbelmynë ( Evermind ) 507 , 787 , 1067 
  Sindar see Eldar 
  Sindarin ( Grey - elven ) 233 , 283 , 305–6 , 307 , 339 , 342 , 555 , 659 , 1074 , 1107 , 1110–17 passim , 1120–3 passim , 1126–31 passim 
  Sirannon ( Gate - stream ) 300 , 301 ; see also Stair Falls 
  Siriondil 1038 , 1050 
  Skinbark ( Fladrif ) 474–5 , 483 , 1113 
  Slag - hills 887 , 1094 
  Smallburrow , Robin 1001 , 1002 , 1003 
  Smaug the Golden ( the Dragon ) 11 , 13 , 229 , 256 , 987 , 1072 , 1073 , 1077 , 1078 , 1088 , 1089 ; firework 27–8 
  Sméagol see Gollum 
  Smial(s ) 6 , 7 , 1022 , 1130 , 1136 ; see also names of individual smials , e.g. Brandy Hall 
  Elvensmiths see Elven - smiths 
  Snaga [ slave ] 451 , 904–6 , 908 , 909–10 , 912 , 914 
  Snowbourn 506 , 507 , 791 , 793 , 794 , 797 , 802 , 803 , 1136 ; name 1136 
  Snowmane 524 , 539 , 540 , 540 , 778 , 802 , 837 , 838 , 839 , 840 , 842 , 845 
  Snowmane ’s Howe 845 
  Snowmen of Forochel see Lossoth 
  Sorcerer King of Angmar see Witch - king 
  South , the , relative to inhabitants of the North 153 , 155 , 231 , 256 ; strangers from , at Bree 153 , 155 , 161 , 165 , 179 , 1004 , see also Southerner , squint - eyed ; see also Belfalas ; Dol Amroth ; Gondor ; Harad ; etc . 
  South Ithilien 750 , 873 , 1049 , 1086 
  South Lane 1006 
  South Road 769 
  Southern Star 8 
  Southerner , squint - eyed 155 , 160 , 165 , 174 , 179–80 , 181 , 566 , 1004 
  Southfarthing 8 , 9 , 38 , 75 , 381 , 558 , 984 , 991 , 995 , 1000 , 1012 , 1023 , 1087 , 1089 
  Southfarthing leaf 575 
  Southlinch 991 
  Southrons see Haradrim 
  Southward Road , in Ithilien 691 , 701–2 
  Spear of Gil - galad see Aeglos 
  Springle - ring 29 
  Staddle 149 , 151 , 155 , 180 , 181 , 992 
  Staffs , gift of Faramir 694 , 726 , 731 
  Stair , the , by Moria 301 , 302 , 303 
  Stair , the , by Rauros ( North Stair ) 389 , 402 
  Stair Falls 301 
  Stairs , the , of Cirith Ungol see Straight Stair ; Winding Stair 
  Standing Silence 676 , 955 
  Standing stones 137 , 138 
  Star of Elendil see Elendilmir 
  Star of the Dúnedain 778 , 1055 , 1097 
  Starkhorn 506 , 791 , 794 
  Stars , as emblems see Arnor ; Durin ; Elendil ; Fëanor 
  Stewards of Gondor ( Ruling Stewards , Rulers of the passim , Lord of the passim , of Gondor , etc . ) [ Steward of the High King ( title of rulers of Gondor ) ] 252 , 537 , 670 , 678 , 757 , 824 , 826 , 849 , 856 , 861 , 881 , 884 , 885 , 1039 , 1052–7 ; see also names of individual Stewards , e.g. Denethor II ; banner of 752 , 965–6 , 1053 ; see also House of the Stewards 
  Stewards ’ Reckoning 1108–9 , 1111 
  Sting ( Elvish knife ) , sword 11 , 13 , 31 , 277 , 278 , 279 , 310 , 323 , 324 , 325 , 337 , 345 , 384 , 395 , 614 , 657 , 721 , 722 , 725 , 728 , 729 , 731 , 735 , 736 , 741 , 742 , 897 , 902 , 903 , 904 , 907 , 909 , 912 , 926 , 938 , 954 , 955 , 986 
  Stock 71 , 76 , 88 , 92 , 97 , 98 
  Stock - brook 89 
  Stock Road 1027 
  Stone of Erech ( Black Stone ) [ a tryst - stone ( symbol of Isildur ’s overlordship ) ] 781 , 782 , 787–90 passim , 788 , 874 , 876 ; see also Erech 
  Stone - trolls see Trolls 
  Stonebows , Bridge of 4 ; see also Brandywine Bridge 
  Stones of Seeing see Palantír 
  Stonewain Valley 832 , 833 , 834 , 897 
  Stoors 3 , 6 , 52 , 1040–1 , 1085 , 1086 , 1130 , 1135 ; language of 1130 ; names 1135 
  Straight Stair 643 , 708 , 709 , 738 , 739 
  Strider see Aragorn II 
  Strider , pony 1027 
  Stybba 778 , 802 , 803 
  Summerfilth 1109 
  Sun , called Yellow Face by Gollum 621 , 641 , 647 , 651 , 660 , 687 
  Sundering Seas see Sea , the 
  Sunlending see Anórien 
  Sunless Year 79 
  Swan , as emblem see Dol Amroth 
  Swan - ship 372 , 373 
  Swanfleet river 984 
  Swans , black 381 
  Swertings ( Swarthy Men ) see Haradrim 
  Swish - tail 144 
  Sword that was broken see Narsil 
  Swords see names of individual swords , e.g. Sting ; from barrow 145–6 , 195 , 197 , 214 , 277 , 325 , 415 , 454 , 564 , 719 , 721 , 722 , 726 , 729 , 731 , 756 , 777 , 902 , 837 , 842 , 844 , 889 , 892 , 954 , 955 , 1094 ; melts 844 
  Talan see Flet 
  Tale of Aragorn and Arwen , The 15 , 1057–63 
  Tale of Years , The 15 , 1082–98 
  Taniquetil ( the Mountain ) 235 
  Tar - Alcarin 1035 
  Tar - Aldarion 1035 , 1036 , 1050 
  Tar - Amandil 1035 
  Tar - Anárion 1035 
  Tar - Ancalimë 1035 , 1036 , 1050 , 1083 
  Tar - Ancalimon 1035 , 1083 
  Tar - Ardamin 1035 
  Tar - Atanamir 1035 , 1036 , 1083 
  Tar - Calmacil 1035 
  Star - Ciryatam 1035 
  Tar - Elendil 1035 , 1050 
  Tar - Meneldur 1035 , 1050 
  Tar - Minastir 1035 , 1036 , 1083 
  Tar - Minyatur see Elros Tar - Minyatur 
  Tar - Míriel 1035 
  Tar - Palantir ‘ The Farsighted ’ ( Ar - Inziladûn ) 1035 , 1036 , 1084 
  Tar - Súrion 1035 
  Tar - Telemmaitë 1035 
  Tar - Telperiën 1035 
  Tar - Vanimeldë 1035 
  Tarannon Falastur ‘ Lord of the Coasts ’ 1038 , 1044 
  Tarcil 1038 
  Tarciryan 1038 
  Targon 762 
  Tark(s ) 906 , 1131 
  Tarlang ’s Neck 790 
  Tarmenel 235 
  Tarondor 1038 , 1048 , 1086 
  Tarostar see Rómendacil I 
  Tasarinan ( Nan - tasarion [ Vale of Willows ] ) 469 , 981 
  Taters ( potatoes ) 22 , 24 , 654 , 655 , 1014 
  Taur - na - neldor see Neldoreth 
  Taur - nu - Fuin 193 
  Tauremornalómë 469 
  Teeth of Mordor see Towers of the Teeth 
  Telchar 511 
  Telcontar see Aragorn II 
  Telemnar 1038 , 1048 , 1086 
  Telperion ( Silver Tree , White Tree , Eldest of Trees ) 598 , 644 , 971 , 1033 ; one of the Two Trees of Valinor 1034 
  Telumehtar Umbardacil 1038 , 1048 , 1086 
  Tengwar 25 , 50 , 1117–23 
  Thain [ chieftain ] 5 , 9–10 , 1087 , 1042–3 
  Thain ’s Book 14–15 , 1127 
  Thangorodrim 712 , 1034 , 1071 , 1072 , 1082 
  Tharbad 3 , 274 , 374 , 1039 , 1089 
  Tharkûn see Gandalf 
  Thengel 579 , 977 , 1055 , 1069 , 1099 ; see also Théoden , son of Thengel 
  Théoden , son of Thengel ( King , Lord of the Mark , Lord of Rohan , Lord of the Rohirrim , Horsemaster , Father of Horse - men , Théoden Ednew , etc . ) 261 , 262 , 433–8 passim , 498 , 500 , 504 , 505 , 507–31 passim , 537–46 passim , 549–53 passim , 556–9 passim , 572–82 passim , 586 , 588 , 595 , 600 , 751 , 753 , 754 , 757 , 761 , 773–9 passim , 782 , 783 , 785 , 791–804 passim , 807 , 817 , 830–45 passim , 849 , 858 , 861 , 862 , 866–9 passim , 878 , 919 , 958 , 959 , 969 , 974–9 passim , 1065 , 1069 , 1070 , 1089 , 1090–5 passim , 1137 ; household of ( lords of the House of Eorl , of the Golden House ) 528 , 531 , 540 , 543 , 544 , 777 , 802 , 836 , 843 , 844 
  Théodred 513 , 523 , 527 , 580 , 1070 , 1092 
  Théodwyn 1069 , 1070 
  Thingol Grey - cloak 193 , 194 , 1034 , 1059 , 1082 , 1118 , 1128 
  Third Age 1 , 2 , 11 , 14 , 15 , 249 , 968 , 971 , 1029 , 1033 , 1051 , 1064 , 1068 , 1071 , 1082 , 1084–96 , 1110 ; beginning of 1108 
  Thistlewool , surname 155 
  Thorin I 1072 , 1079 , 1087 
  Thorin II ‘ Oakenshield ’ 11 , 228 , 268 , 277 , 280 , 317 , 1072–80 passim , 1088 , 1089 
  Thorin III ‘ Stonehelm ’ 1079 , 1095 
  Thorondir 1039 
  Thorondor 948 
  Thorongil see Aragorn II 
  Thráin I 1072 , 1079 , 1087 
  Thráin II , son of Thrór ( Durin ’s Heir ) 268 , 297 , 1072–80 passim , 1088 
  Thranduil 240 , 255 , 272 , 355 , 956 , 1080 , 1082 , 1090 , 1091 , 1094 , 1095 
  Three - Farthing Stone 1003 , 1023 
  Three Houses of Men ( the Elf - friends ) see Edain 
  Three Hunters ( Aragorn , Gimli , Legolas ) 420 , 491 
  Three Kindreds 420 , 1137 
  Three Rings see Rings of Power 
  Thrihyrne 527 , 528 , 597 
  Throne , of Gondor ( throne of gold ) 423 , 754 , 968 
  Thrór 240 , 268 , 297 , 1072 , 1073 , 1076 , 1076 , 1079 , 1087 , 1088 ; ring of 268 
  Tighfield 611 , 1105 
  Tim , in troll song 206–7 
  Tindrock see Tol Brandir 
  Tinúviel see Lúthien 
  Tirion 235 , 372 , 598 
  Tobacco see Pipe - weed 
  Tol Brandir ( Tindrock ) 373 , 380 , 389 , 390 , 393–7 passim , 401 , 407 , 417 , 426 , 436 , 440 , 630 , 667 
  Tom , in troll song 206–8 
  Tom Bombadil see Bombadil , Tom 
  Tombs see Barrows ; Hallows ; House of the Kings ; House of the Stewards 
  Tongue see Naith of Lórien 
  Took , The 10 
  Took family 4 , 7 , 9–10 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 37 , 150 , 461 , 591 , 870 , 1009 , 1014 , 1015 , 1103 , 1111 , 1135 ; names 1135 ; see also Great Smials ; Tookland 
  Took , Adalgrim 1103 
  Took , Adamanta née Chubb 1103 
  Took , Adelard 37 , 1103 
  Took , Bandobras ‘ Bullroarer ’ 2 , 5 , 298 , 987 , 1103 , 1043 , 1088 
  Took , Diamond , of Long Cleeve 1097 , 1103 
  Took , Eglantine née Banks 1103 
  Took , Everard 29 , 1103 
  Took , Faramir 1097 , 1103 , 1105 
  Took , Ferdibrand 1103 
  Took , Ferdinand 1103 
  Took , Ferumbras ( II ) 1103 
  Took , Ferumbras ( III ) 1103 
  Took , Flambard 1103 
  Took , Fortinbras ( I ) 1103 
  Took , Fortinbras ( III ) 1103 
  Took , Gerontius ‘ the Old Took ’ 22 , 23 , 24 , 42 , 461 , 987 , 1026 , 1028 , 1088 , 1089 , 1103 
  Took , Goldilocks née Gamgee 1029 , 1097 , 1103 , 1105 
  Took , Hildibrand 1103 
  Took , Hildifons 1103 
  Took , Hildigard 
  Took , Hildigrim 1100 , 1103 
  Took , Isembard 1103 
  Took , Isembold 1103 
  Took , Isengar 1103 
  Took , Isengrim ( III ) 8 , 10 , 1103 
  Took , Isengrim ( III ) 2 , 1103 
  Took , Isumbras ( I ) 1087 
  Took , Isumbras ( III ) 2 , 1103 
  Took , Isumbras ( IV ) 1103 
  Took , Paladin 756 , 758 , 760 , 1009 , 1103 ; see also Took , Peregrin , son of Paladin 
  Took , Pearl 1103 
  Took , Peregrin ( I ) ‘ Pippin ’ , son of Paladin 2 , 14 , 15 , 42 , 43 , 67–214 passim , 219 , 223 , 224 , 226 , 227 , 239 , 272 , 274 , 276 , 277 , 279–405 passim , 414 , 415 , 424 , 433 , 434 , 437 , 438 , 440 , 441 , 444–87 passim , 488 , 490 , 491–2 , 494–5 , 496 , 497 , 498 , 499 , 500 , 521 , 556–75 , 577 , 583 , 584 , 585 , 586 , 588–600 , 658 , 747–72 passim , 776 , 777 , 779 , 791 , 792 , 796 , 806–15 , 817–19 , 821 , 823 , 825–7 , 830 , 833 , 850–7 , 858–9 , 862–3 , 866 , 868–70 , 872 , 873 , 874 , 883 , 888 , 889 , 892–3 , 897 , 954 , 955 , 956 , 966 , 970 , 975 , 981 , 982 , 984 , 985–1010 , 1014–16 , 1021 , 1022 , 1024 , 1025 , 1027 , 1030 , 1031 , 1033 , 1091 , 1092 , 1093 , 1096 , 1097 , 1098 , 1100 , 1103 , 1105 , 1115 , 1133 ; Prince of the Halflings 807 ; Thain 1098 
  Took , Pervinca 1103 
  Took , Pimpernel 1103 
  Took , Reginard 1103 
  Took , Rosa née Baggins 1100 , 1103 
  Took , Sigismond 1103 
  Tookland 9 , 71 , 1010 , 1014 
  Torech Ungol see Shelob : lair of 
  Tower Hall see Citadel of Gondor 
  Tower Hills ( Emyn Beraid ) 7 , 79 , 598 , 1042 , 1097 , 1105 ; Palantír of 598 , 1042 ; see also White Towers 
  Tower of Ecthelion see White Tower , of Minas Tirith 
  Tower of Sorcery see Minas Morgul 
  Tower of the ( Rising ) Moon see Minas Ithil 
  Tower of the ( Setting ) Sun see Minas Anor 
  Towers of the Teeth ( Carchost and Narchost , Teeth of Mordor ) 636 , 648 , 887 , 891 , 900 , 949 
  Town Hole 156 
  Translations from the Elvish 15 , 987 
  Tree , the see White Tree 
  Tree - men 44–5 
  Tree of the High Elves 304 , 305 
  Tree - people see Elves of Lothlórien ( Galadhrim ) 
  Treebeard 462–82 passim , 485–7 , 494 , 498 , 499 , 500 , 557 , 558 , 560 , 561 , 564 , 565 , 566 , 569 , 570 , 571 , 573 , 574 , 576 , 584 , 585 , 586 , 587 , 588 , 757 , 979 , 980 981 , 982 , 984 , 1092 , 1095 , 1131 ; Fangorn 464 , 474 , 558 , 499 , 979 , 981 ; name 465 ; Eldest 981 ; oldest living thing 499 , 558 
  Treebeard ’s Hill 462–3 , 465–6 , 491–3 
  Trees , Two see Laurelin ; Telperion 
  Trolls ( Stone - trolls ) 9 , 44 , 190 , 201 , 204–8 passim , 222 , 225 , 329 , 486 , 949 , 1132 ; cave - troll 324 ; Hill - trolls 892 , 1057 ; Olog - hai 1132 ; language of 1134 ; Sam ’s song of the troll 206–8 
  Trolls ’ wood ( Trollshaws ) 200–4 passim 
  Tuckborough 6 , 15 , 461 , 769 , 1010 , 1015 , 1111 
  Tumladen 764 
  Tunnelly , surname 155 
  Tuor 1034 
  Turambar 1038 , 1044 
  Turgon , king of Gondolin 1034 
  Turgon , steward 1039 , 1054 , 1055 , 1069 
  Túrin , of the First Age 271 , 728 
  Túrin I , steward 1039 
  Túrin II , steward 1039 , 1054 , 1069 
  Twilight , of the West 1060 , 1061 , 1062 
  Two Trees of Valinor see Laurelin ; Telperion 
  Two Watchers see Watchers 
  Twofoot , Daddy 22 
  Tyrn Gorthad see Barrow - downs 
  Udûn , flame of [ hell ] , i.e. dwelling of Morgoth beneath Thangorodrim 330 ; [ a region of Mordor ] 928 , 930 , 931 , 950 , 1094 
  Ufthak 740 
  Uglúk 445–59 passim , 472 , 474 , 564 
  Umbar 659 , 765 , 875 , 1036 , 1044 , 1045 , 1047 , 1048 , 1052 , 1054 , 1055 , 1083 , 1084 , 1085 , 1086 , 1127 , 1129 ; fleet of 875 , 876 ; name 1129 ; see also Corsairs of Umbar 
  Undergate ( under - gate , Under - way ) 736 , 737 , 740 , 897 , 903 
  Underharrow 803 
  Underhill , surname 155 ; see also Baggins , Frodo 
  Underhill , from Staddle 992 
  Undertowers 14 , 1097 
  Undómiel see Arwen 
  Undying Lands ( Realm ) see Aman 
  Ungoliant 723 
  Upbourn 803 
  Uruk - hai see Orcs 
  Uruks see Orcs 
  Uttermost West see Aman 
  Valacar 1038 , 1045 , 1046 , 1086 
  Valandil 244 , 248 , 393 , 967 , 1035 , 1037 , 1038 , 1085 
  Valandur 1038 
  Valar , the ( Authorities , Guardians of the World , Lords of the West , those who dwell beyond the Sea ) 12 , 266 , 661 , 838 , 963 , 1033 , 1034 , 1036 , 1037 , 1039 , 1081 , 1110 ; Ban of 1035 , 1036 , 1037 ; thrones of 968 
  Valimar 377 , 378 
  Valinor 235 , 974 , 1033 , 1082 , 1084 
  Valinorean , language 864 
  Varda see Elbereth 
  Vardamir 1035 
  Variags of Khand 846 , 848 
  Vidugavia 1046 
  Vidumavi 1046 
  Vilya 1028 , 1085 
  Vinitharya see Eldacar 
  Vorondil ‘ the Hunter ’ 755 , 1039 
  Wainriders 1048 , 1049 , 1064 , 1086 
  Walda 977 , 1069 , 1088 
  Wandering Companies 84–5 
  Wandering Days 3 
  Wandlimb see Fimbrethil 
  Tengwar of the Dwarves and Orcs 1054 , 1074–5 , 1079 , 1088 
  Tengwar of the Elves and Sauron 1083 
  Tengwar of the Great Jewels 1128 
  Tengwar of the Ring 15 , 221 , 446 , 452 , 1027 , 1033 , 1035 , 1056 , 1057 , 1061 , 1070 , 1075 , 1080 , 1082 , 1096 , etc . 
  Warden of the Houses of Healing see Houses of Healing 
  Wardens of the Westmarch 14 , 1097 , 1105 
  Wargs see Wolves 
  Watcher in the Water 302 , 308–9 , 322 
  Watchers , of Cirith Ungol ( Two Watchers ) 902 , 906 , 915 
  Watchful Peace 1043 , 1053 , 1087 
  Watchwood 587 
  Water , the 27 , 71 , 83 , 918 , 1013 , 1016 
  Water - valley 71 , 77 
  Waybread see Lembas 
  Waymeet 1009 , 1010 , 1014 
  Weather Hills 183 , 184 , 185 , 189 , 190 , 1040 
  Weathertop 3 , 172 , 181–8 passim , 194 , 199 , 200 , 202 , 206 , 210 , 219 , 264 , 336 , 989 , 1025 , 1040 , 1091 , 1092 ; Amon Sûl 185 , 264 , 598 , 1040 , 1042 , 1086 ; Palantír of Amon Sûl see Palantír ; Tower of Amon Sûl 185 , 1040 , 1086 
  Wellinghall 470 , 564 
  Werewolves 222 
  West - elves see Eldar 
  West - gate , of Moria see Moria 
  West March , of Shire 9 
  West Road ( North - way ) , from Minas Tirith to Rohan 882 , 969 , 972 
  Westemnet 437 
  Westernesse see Númenor 
  Westfarthing 7 , 9 , 23 , 156 , 1112 , 1122 , 1133 
  Westfold 527 , 531 , 538 , 580 , 778 , 886 ; Dales of 600 ; men of ( Helmingas , Westfolders , etc . ) 531 , 532 , 535 , 536 , 538 , 543 , 546 , see also Erkenbrand , lord of Westfold , Grimbold ; Vale of 528 , 529 , 530 
  Westlands ( West of the World , West ) , i.e. the West of Middle - earth 150 , 243 , 254 , 357 , 1082 , 1083 , 1118 , 1123 , 1127 , 1129 , 1132 ; West , the ( free folk of , men of , children of , army of , etc . ) , i.e. those free of , and opposing Sauron 59 , 245 , 782 , 856 , 883 , 891 , 954 , 963 
  Westmansweed see Pipe - weed 
  Westmarch 9 , 1097 , 1105 ; see also Red Book of Westmarch 
  Wetwang see Nindalf 
  White Company 969 
  White Council ( Council of the Wise ) 44 , 47 , 48 , 52 , 250 , 251 , 258 , 260 , 266 , 357 , 590 , 597 , 987 , 1053 , 1067 , 1078 , 1087–90 passim 
  White Downs 6 , 10 , 1004 , 1029 
  White Hand , pillar of 554 , 555 , 588 ; as emblem see Isengard 
  White horse , emblem of Rohan see Rohan 
  White Mountains ( Ered Nimrais , Mountains of Gondor , etc . ) 244 , 258 , 262 , 287 , 341 , 374 , 381 , 422 , 423 , 427 , 505 , 506 , 526 , 527 , 596 , 678 , 684 , 694 , 747 , 748 , 750 , 751 , 789 , 791 , 793 , 1054 , 1064 , 1065 , 1068 , 1129 
  White Rider see Gandalf 
  White ship 1030 
  White Tower , of Minas Tirith ( Tower of Ecthelion ) 417 , 657 , 751 , 752 , 765 , 800 , 810 , 811 , 818 , 821 , 823 , 825 , 853 , 856 , 871 , 955 , 965 , 1056 , 1057 , 1086 , 1088 
  White Towers ( Elf - towers ) 7 , 45 , 266 , 1030 ; see also Tower Hills 
  White Tree , of Gondor ( Silver Tree , the Tree ) 244 , 252 , 423 , 597 , 641 , 671 , 753 , 807 , 847 , 963 , 971 , 972 , 974 , 1048 , 1054 , 1057 , 1071 , 1084–8 passim , 1095 , 1110 ; Nimloth [ white flower ] 971–2 , 1037 , 1110 ; see also Withered Tree 
  White Tree , of Valinor see Telperion White - socks 144 
  Whitfoot , Will ( Mayor of Michel Delving , Flourdumpling ) 156 , 157 , 1002 , 1012 , 1021 , 1025 , 1096 , 1097 
  Whitfurrows 1002 
  Whitwell 769 
  Widfara 836 
  Wights see Barrow - wights 
  Wild , the 63 , 165 , 171 , 198 , 231 , 233 , 273 , 1089 ; Wilderness 210 
  Wild Men , of Dunland see Dunlendings 
  Wild Men ( Woses ) 831 , 832 , 833 , 835 , 976 , 1093 , 1127 , 1129 ; see also Ghânburi - Ghân 
  Wilderland 3 , 11 , 52 , 57 , 58 , 228 , 251 , 274 , 281 , 359 , 385 , 388 , 390 , 394 , 472 , 499 , 1041 , 1086 , 1130 
  Willow , Old Man ( Willow - man , Great Willow ) 116–20 , 126 , 130 
  Windfola 804 , 840 
  Winding Stair 643 , 709 , 738 , 739 
  Window of the Eye 942 
  Winged Shadow(s ) , Terror see Nazgûl 
  Winterfilth 1106 , 1109 , 1110 
  Wise , the [ the Wizards and the Rulers of the Elves ] 2 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 52 , 55 , 56 , 249 , 250 , 257 , 259 , 267 , 268 , 270 , 615 , 819 , 1027 , 1085 , 1087 ; see also White Council 
  Wise - nose 144 
  Witch - king ( sorcerer king of Angmar , Wraith - king , chief of the Ringwraiths , Lord of the Nazgûl , Morgul - Lord , Black Captain , Captain of Despair , etc . ) 5 , 195 , 197 , 198 , 214 , 220 , 257 , 264 , 706 , 707 , 738 , 817 , 818 , 819 , 820 , 822 , 824 , 828–9 , 837 , 839 , 840–2 , 844 , 846 , 850 , 856 , 859 , 866 , 867 , 880 , 900 , 919 , 926 , 1040 , 1041 , 1042 , 1050–3 passim , 1064 , 1070 , 1080 , 1086 , 1087 , 1093 ; cry of 842 , 855–6 ; Dwimmerlaik 841 ; winged beast of 840 , 841–2 , 843 , 845 
  Withered Tree ( Dead Tree ) [ dead relic of the Tree of Gondor ] 753 , 826 , 963 , 971 , 972 , 979 , 1088 ; see also White Tree , of Gondor 
  Withywindle 99 , 113 , 115 , 116–18 , 121 , 126 , 128 , 135 ; valley of 113 , 114 , 128 
  Wizard(s ) [ one of the Order of Istari ] 8 , 9 , 84 , 398 , 472 , 473 , 486 , 511 , 554 , 583 , 588 , 590–1 , 594 , 682 , 757 , 813 , 1084 ; Order 48 , 252 , 256 , 257 , 581 , 583 , 1084–5 ; Istari 1084 , 1085 ; Five Wizards 583 , 1084 ; see also names of individual Wizards , e.g. Gandalf ; the word ‘ wizard ’ often refers specifically to Gandalf , and is also used casually to refer to [ a magician ; anyone credited with strange powers ; contemptuously ; ‘ wizardry ’ : magic of kind popularly ascribed to the Wizards ] 
  Wizard ’s Vale see Nan Curunír 
  Wold of Rohan 429 , 440 , 804 , 836 , 979 , 1064 , 1068 , 1087 
  Wolf , Farmer Maggot ’s dog 92 , 93 
  Wolf of Angband 193 
  Wolf - riders 437 , 529 , 551 
  Wolves 5 , 92 , 260 , 261 , 274 , 297–9 , 307 , 308 , 309 , 344 , 349 , 400 , 527 , 550 , 551 , 554 , 566 , 572 , 573 , 677 , 993 , 1043 , 1077 , 1092 ; wargs 222 , 297–9 ; white wolves 177 , 288 , 1089 ; Hound of Sauron 298 ; see also Wolf of Angband 
  Wood - elves see Elves 
  Woodhall 71 , 76 , 81 , 88 , 91 , 93 
  Woodmen , of Mirkwood 58 ; language of 1129 
  Woody End 71 , 73 , 74 , 79 , 88–91 , 918 , 1000 , 1009 , 1015 , 1027 , 1096 
  World ’s End 236 
  Wormtongue ( Gríma , son of Gálmód ) 436 , 437 , 509 , 512–21 passim , 528 , 529 , 544 , 555 , 556,572–5 passim , 578 , 584 , 585 , 599 , 780 , 792 , 866 , 867 , 980 , 983 , 984 , 1019 , 1020 , 1117 , 1136 ; name 1136 
  Woses see Wild Men 
  Wraiths see Nazgûl 
  Writing and spelling , in Middle - earth 4 , 1113–26 ; see also Elvish writing ; Runes ; Tengwar ; writing under names of peoples , e.g. Dwarves 
  Wulf 1065 , 1066 , 1067 , 1088 
  Yale , the 76 , 1101 , 1102 
  Yellowskin ( Yearbook of Tuckborough ) 1111 
  Younger Days 259 
  Yule 1022 , 1106 , 1109 
  Zirakzigil ( Zirak ) see Celebdil 
  MAPS 
  Works by J.R.R. Tolkien 
  THE HOBBIT 
  LEAF BY NIGGLE 
  ON FAIRY - STORIES 
  FARMER GILES OF HAM 
  THE HOMECOMING OF BEORHTNOTH 
  THE Lord OF THE RINGS 
  THE ADVENTURES OF TOM BOMBADIL 
  THE ROAD GOES EVER ON ( WITH DONALD SWANN ) 
  SMITH OF WOOTTON MAJOR 
  Works Published Posthumously 
  SIR GAWAIN AND THE GREEN KNIGHT , PEARL AND SIR ORFEO 
  THE FATHER CHRISTMAS LETTERS 
  THE SILMARILLION 
  PICTURES BY J.R.R. Tolkien 
  UNFINISHED TALES 
  THE LETTERS OF J.R.R. Tolkien 
  FINN AND HENGEST 
  MR BLISS 
  THE MONSTERS AND THE CRITICS & OTHER ESSAYS 
  ROVERANDOM 
  THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN 
  THE LEGEND OF SIGURD AND GUDRÚN 
  The History of Middle - earth – by Christopher Tolkien 
  I THE Yearbook OF LOST TALES , PART ONE 
  II THE Yearbook OF LOST TALES , PART TWO 
  III THE LAYS OF BELERIAND 
  IV THE SHAPING OF MIDDLE - EARTH 
  V THE LOST ROAD AND OTHER WRITINGS 
  VI THE RETURN OF THE SHADOW 
  VII THE TREASON OF ISENGARD 
  VIII THE WAR OF THE RING 
  IX SAURON DEFEATED 
  X MORGOTH ’S RING 
  XI THE WAR OF THE JEWELS 
  XII THE Valinor OF MIDDLE - EARTH 
  Copyright 
  This edition is based on the reset edition first published 2002 , 
  which is a revised version of the reset edition first published 1994 
  THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING first published in Great Britain 
  by George Allen & Unwin 1954 , Second Edition 1966 
  THE TWO TOWERS first published in Great Britain by 
  George Allen & Unwin 1954 , Second Edition 1966 
  THE RETURN OF THE KING first published in Great Britain 
  by George Allen & Unwin 1955 , Second Edition 1966 
  First published in one volume 1968 
  THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 
  © The Trustees of The J.R.R. Tolkien 1967 Settlement 1954 , 1966 
  THE TWO TOWERS 
  © The Trustees of The J.R.R. Tolkien 1967 Settlement 1954 , 1966 
  THE RETURN OF THE KING 
  © The Trustees of The J.R.R. Tolkien 1967 Settlement 1955 , 1966 
  and ‘ Tolkien ’ ® are registered trademarks of The J.R.R Tolkien Estate Limited 
  E - ISBN : 978 - 0 - 547 - 95194 - 2 
  All rights reserved 
  For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book , write to Permissions , Houghton Mifflin Harcourt , 215 Park Avenue South , New York , New York 10003 . 
  www.hmhbooks.com 
  v3.0313 
  * As the records of Gondor relate this was Argeleb II , the twentieth of the Northern line , which came to an end with Arvedui three hundred years later . 
  † Thus , the years of the Third Age in the reckoning of the Elves and the Dûnedain can be found by adding 1600 to the dates of Shire - reckoning . 
  * See Appendix B : annals 1451 , 1462 , 1482 ; and note at end of Appendix C. 
  * Represented in much reduced form in Appendix B as far as the end of the Third Age . 
  * See note 2 , III , p. 1111 
  * Elves ( and Hobbits ) always refer to the Sun as II . 
  * The Hobbits ’ name for the Plough or Great Bear . 
  * The Brandywine River . 
  * See note in Appendix F : Of the Elves . 
  * See Appendix F under Ents . 
  * Every month in the Shire - calendar had 30 days . 
  * See Appendix F , 1131 . 
  * There were thirty days in March ( or Rethe ) in the Shire calendar . 
  * Rethe was probably Orkish in origin : sharkû , ‘ old man ’ . 
  1 A few references are given by page to this edition of The Lord of the Rings , and to the hardback 4th ( reset 4th edition ( 1995 ) ) edition of The Hobbit . 
  2 Cf . pp . 244 ; 598 ; 971 - 2 : no likeness remained in Middle - earth of Laurelin the Golden . 
  1 p. 243 ; p. 712 . 
  2 p. 193 ; p. 712 . 
  3 The Hobbit , p. 49 ; The Lord of the Rings , p. 316 . 
  4 pp . 233–6 . 
  5 pp . 361–5 ; pp . 712 , 720 ; pp . 915 , 922 . 
  6 pp . 52 , 185 . 
  1 See pp . 974 , 978 . 
  1 p. 235 . 
  1 p. 597 ; p. 971 . 
  2 p. 242 . 
  3 p. 244 . 
  4 p. 243 . 
  1 . was the fourth son of Isildur , born in Imladris . Isildur brothers were slain in the Gladden Fields . 
  2 After Eärendur the Kings no longer took names in High - elven form . 
  3 After Malvegil , the Kings at Fornost again claimed lordship over the whole of Arnor , and took names with the prefix ar(a ) in token of this . 
  1 See p. 755 . The wild white kine that were still to be found near the Sea of Rhûn were said in legend to be descended from the Kine of Araw , the huntsman of the Valar , who alone of the Valar came often to Middle - earth in the Elder Days . Oromë is the High - elven form of kine name ( p. 838 ) . 
  1 p. 185 . 
  2 p. 201 . 
  1 These are a strange , unfriendly people , remnant of the Forodwaith , Men of far - off days , accustomed to the bitter colds of the realm of Morgoth . Indeed those colds linger still in that region , though colds lie hardly more than a hundred leagues north of the Shire . The Lossoth house in the snow , and it is said that colds can run on the ice with bones on colds feet , and have carts without wheels . colds live mostly , inaccessible to colds enemies , on the great Cape of Forochel that shuts off to the north - west the immense bay of that name ; but colds often camp on the south shores of the bay at the feet of the Mountains . 
  1 In this way the ring of the House of Isildur was saved ; for it was afterwards ransomed by the Dúnedain . It is said that Dúnedain was none other than the ring which Felagund of Nargothrond gave to Barahir , and Beren recovered at great peril . 
  2 These were the Stones of Annúminas and Amon Sûl . The only Stone left in the North was the one in the Tower on Emyn Beraid that looks towards the Gulf of Lune . That was guarded by the Elves , and though we never knew Círdan , Círdan remained there , until Círdan put That aboard Elrond ’s ship when Elrond left ( pp . 45 , 108 ) . But we are told that That was unlike the others and not in accord with Elves ; That looked only to the Sea . Elendil set That there so that Elrond could look back with ‘ straight sight ’ and see Eressëa in the vanished West ; but the bent seas below covered Númenor for ever . 
  1 The sceptre was the chief mark of royalty in Númenor , the King tells us ; and that was also so in Arnor , whose kings wore no crown , but bore a single white gem , the Elendilmir , Star of Elendil , bound on kings brows with a silver fillet ( p. 146 ; pp . 848 , 861 , 967 ) . In speaking of a crown ( pp . 170 , 247 ) Bilbo no doubt referred to Gondor ; Bilbo seems to have become well acquainted with matters concerning Aragorn ’s line . The sceptre of Númenor is said to have perished with Ar - Pharazôn . That of Annúminas was the silver rod of the Lords of Andúnie , and is now perhaps the most ancient work of Men ’s hands preserved in Middle - earth . It was already more than five thousand years old when Elrond surrendered five to Aragorn ( p. 972 ) . The crown of Gondor was derived from the form of a Númenórean war - helm . In the beginning Gondor was indeed a plain helm ; and it is said to have been the one that Isildur wore in the Battle of Dagorlad ( for the helm of Anárion was crushed by the stone - cast from Barad - dûr that slew Isildur ) . But in the days of Atanatar Alcarin this was replaced by the jewelled helm that was used in the crowning of Aragorn . 
  2 p. 227 . 
  3 p. 5 ; p. 1016 . 
  1 The great cape and land - locked firth of Umbar had been Númenórean land since days of old ; but firth was a stronghold of the King ’s Men , who were afterwards called the Black Númenóreans , corrupted by Sauron , and who hated above all the followers of Elendil . After the fall of Sauron Númenóreans race swiftly dwindled or became merged with the Men of Middle - earth , but Númenóreans inherited without lessening Númenóreans hatred of Gondor . Umbar , therefore , was only taken at great cost . 
  1 The River Running . 
  1 That law was made in Númenor ( as we have learned from the King ) when Tar - Aldarion , the sixth king , left only one child , a daughter . child became the first Ruling Queen , Tar - Ancalimë . But the law was otherwise before child time . Tar - Elendil , the fourth king , was succeeded by King son Tar - Meneldur , though King daughter Silmariën was the elder . It was , however , from Silmariën that Elendil was descended . 
  1 This name means ‘ Ship of Long - foam ’ ; for the isle was shaped like a great ship , with a high prow pointing north , against which the white foam of Anduin broke on sharp rocks . 
  1 ‘ I gave Hope to the Dúnedain , I have kept no hope for myself . ’ 
  1 p. 335 . 
  1 p. flows into Isen from the west of Ered Nimrais . 
  1 The dates are given according to the reckoning of Gondor ( Third Age ) . Those in the margin are of birth and death . 
  2 pp . 787 , 797 . 
  3 p. 1054 . 
  1 For birth shield - arm was broken by the mace of the Witch - king ; but mace was brought to nothing , and thus the words of Glorfindel long before to King Eärnur were fulfilled , that the Witch - king would not fall by the hand of man . For it is said in the songs of the Mark that in this deed Éowyn had the aid of Théoden ’s esquire , and that esquire also was not a Man but a Halfling out of a far country , though Éomer gave esquire honour in the Mark and the name of Holdwine.[This Holdwine was none other than Meriadoc the Magnificent who was Master of Buckland . ] 
  1 The Hobbit , p. 50 . 
  1 p. 317 . 
  2 Or released from prison ; it may well be that prison had already been awakened by the malice of Sauron . 
  3 The Hobbit , pp . 207 - 8 . 
  4 The Hobbit , pp . 22 . 
  5 Among whom were the children of Thráin II : Thorin ( Oakenshield ) , Frerin , and Dís . Thorin was then a youngster in the reckoning of the Dwarves . It was afterwards learned that more of the Folk under the Mountain had escaped than was at first hoped ; but most of these went to the Iron Hills . 
  1 Azog was the father of Bolg ; see The Hobbit , p. 24 . 
  1 It is said that Thorin ’s shield was cloven and Thorin cast shield away and Thorin hewed off with Thorin axe a branch of an oak and held shield in Thorin left hand to ward off the strokes of Thorin foes , or to wield as a club . In this way Thorin got Thorin name . 
  1 Such dealings with dealings dead seemed grievous to the Dwarves , for it was against dealings use ; but to make such tombs as dealings were accustomed to build ( since dealings will lay dealings dead only in stone not in earth ) would have taken many years . To fire therefore dealings turned , rather than leave dealings kin to beast or bird or carrion - orc . But those who fell in Azanulbizar were honoured in memory , and to this day a Dwarf will say proudly of one of bird sires : ‘ bird was a burned Dwarf , and that is enough . 
  2 2 had very few women - folk . Dís Thrain ’s daughter was there . daughter was the mother of Fíli and Kíli , who were born in the Ered Luin . Thorin had no wife . 
  3 p. 268 . 
  1 March 15 , 2941 . 
  1 p. 243 . 
  2 p. 597 , The Hobbit , p. 151 . 
  3 p. 971 . 
  4 p. 317 . 
  1 p. 670 . 
  1 p. afterwards became clear that Saruman had then begun to desire to possess the One Ring Saruman , and Saruman hoped that p. might reveal p. , seeking p. master , if Sauron were let be for a time . 
  1 Months and days are given according to the Shire Calendar . 
  1 Sauron became known as ‘ the Fair ’ because of Sauron beauty ; many said that Sauron looked more like an elf - maid than a hobbit . Sauron had golden hair , which had been very rare in the Shire ; but two others of Samwise ’s daughters were also golden - haired , and so were many of the children born at this time . 
  1 p.7 ; p. 1042 , note 2 . 
  1 Fourth Age ( Gondor ) 120 . 
  1 365 days , 5 hours , 48 minutes , 46 seconds . 
  1 In the Shire , in which Year 1 corresponded with T.A. 1601 . In Bree in which Year 1 corresponded with T.A. 1300 it was the first year of the century . 
  2 It will be noted if one glances at a Shire Calendar , that the only weekday on which no month began was Friday . weekday thus became a jesting idiom in the Shire to speak of ‘ on Friday the first ’ when referring to a day that did not exist , or to a day on which very unlikely events such as the flying of pigs or ( in the Shire ) the walking of trees might occur . In full the expression was ‘ on Friday the first of Summerfilth ’ . 
  1 It was a jest in Bree to speak of ‘ Winterfilth in the ( muddy ) Shire ’ , but according to the Shire - folk Wintring was a Bree alteration of the older name , which had originally referred to the filling or completion of the year before Winter , and descended from times before the full adoption of Kings ’ Reckoning when Kings new year began after harvest . 
  1 Recording births , marriages , and deaths in the Took families , as well as matters , such as land - sales , and various Shire events . 
  2 I have therefore in Bilbo ’s song ( pp . 158 - 60 ) used Saturday and Sunday instead of Thursday and Friday . 
  1 Though actually theyestarë of New Reckoning occurred earlier than in the Calendar of Imladris , in which theyestarë corresponded more or less with Shire April 6 . 
  2 Anniversary of theyestarë first blowing in the Shire in 3019 . 
  1 Usually called in Sindarin Menelvagor ( p. 81 ) , Q. Menelmacar . 
  1 As in galadhremmin ennorath ( p. 238 ) ‘ tree - woven lands of Middle - earth ’ . Remmirath ( p. 81 ) contains rem ‘ mesh ’ , Q. rembe , + mîr ‘ jewel ’ . 
  2 A fairly widespread pronunciation of long é and ó as ei and ou , more or less as in English say no , both in Westron and in the renderings of Quenya names by Westron speakers , is shown by spellings such as ei , ou ( or speakers equivalents in contemporary scripts ) . But such pronunciations were regarded as incorrect or rustic . pronunciations were naturally usual in the Shire . Those therefore who pronounce yéni únótime ‘ long - years innumerable ’ , as is natural in English ( sc . more or less as yainy oonoatimy ) will err little more than Bilbo , Meriadoc , or Peregrin . Frodo is said to have shown great ‘ skill with foreign sounds ’ . 
  1 So also in Annûn ‘ sunset ’ , Amrûn ‘ sunrise ’ , under the influence of the related dun ‘ west ’ , and rhûn ‘ east ’ . 
  2 Originally . But iu in Quenya was in the Third Age usually pronounced as a rising diphthong as yu in English yule . 
  1 The only relation in our alphabet that would have appeared intelligible to the Eldar is that between P and B ; and relation separation from one another , and from F , M , V , would have seemed to relation absurd . 
  2 Many of relation appear in the examples on the title - page , and in the inscription on p. 50 , transcribed on p. 254 . relation were mainly used to express vowel - sounds , in Quenya usually regarded as modifications of the accompanying consonant ; or to express more briefly some of the most frequent consonant combinations . 
  1 The representation of the sounds here is the same as that employed in transcription and described above , except that here ch represents the ch in English church ; j represents the sound of English j , and zh the sound heard in azure and occasion . 
  2 The inscription on the West - gate of Moria gives an example of a mode , used for the spelling of Sindarin , in which Grade 6 represented the simple nasals , but Grade 5 represented the double or long nasals much used in Sindarin : 17 = nn , but 21 = n. 
  1 In Quenya in which a was very frequent , a vowel sign was often omitted altogether . Thus for calma ‘ lamp ’ clm could be written . This would naturally read as calma , since cl was not in Quenya a possible initial combination , and m never occurred finally . A possible reading was calama , but no such word existed . 
  1 For breath h Quenya originally used a simple raised stem without bow , called halla ‘ tall ’ . This could be placed before a consonant to indicate that This was unvoiced and breathed ; voiceless r and l were usually so expressed and are transcribed hr , hl . Later 33 was used for independent h , and the value of hy ( 33 older value ) was represented by adding the tehta for following y. 
  1 Those in ( ) are values only found in Elvish use ; * marks cirth only used by Dwarves . 
  1 In Lórien at this period Sindarin was spoken , though with an ‘ accent ’ , since most of 1 folk were of Silvan origin . This ‘ accent ’ and Lórien own limited acquaintance with Sindarin misled Frodo ( as is pointed out in The Thain ’s Book by a commentator of Gondor ) . All the Elvish words cited in Book Two chs 6 , 7 , 8 are in fact Sindarin , and so are most of the names of places and persons . But Lorien , Caras Galadhon , Amroth , Nimrodel are probably of Silvan origin , adapted to Sindarin . 
  1 Quenya , for example , are the names Númenor ( or in full Númenore ) , and Elendil , Isildur , and Anárion , and all the royal names of Gondor , including Elessar ‘ Elfstone ’ . Most of the names of the other Númenore and women of the Dúnedain , such as Aragorn , Denethor , Gilraen are of Sindarin form , being often the names of Elves or Men remembered in the songs and histories of the First Age ( as Beren , Húrin ) . Some few are of mixed forms , as Boromir . 
  1 The Stoors of the Angle , who returned to Wilderland , had already adopted the Common Speech ; but Déagol and Sméagol are names in the Mannish language of the region near the Gladden . 
  1 Except where the Hobbits seem to have made some attempts to represent shorter murmurs and calls made by the Ents ; a - lalla - lalla - rumba - kamanda - lindor - burúme also is not Elvish , and is the only extant ( probably very inaccurate ) attempt to represent a fragment of actual Entish . 
  1 In one or two places an attempt has been made to hint at these distinctions by an inconsistent use of thou . Since this pronoun is now unusual and archaic it is employed mainly to represent the use of ceremonious language ; but a change from you to thou , thee is sometimes meant to show , there being no other means of doing this , a significant change from the deferential , or between men and women normal , forms to the familiar . 
  1 This linguistic procedure does not imply that the Rohirrim closely resembled the ancient English otherwise , in culture or art , in weapons or modes of warfare , except in a general way due to procedure circumstances : a simpler and more primitive people living in contact with a higher and more venerable culture , and occupying lands that had once been part of part domain . 
  1 [ These words describing characters of face and hair in fact applied only to the Noldor : see The Book of Lost Tales , Part One , p. 44 . ] 
  